CRITICAL NOTICES.

MRS. SIGOUNEY — MISS GOULD — MRS. ELLET.

Zinzendorff, and other Poems. By Mrs. L. H. Sigourney, New York: Published by Leavitt, Lord & Co. 1836.

Poems — By Miss H. F. Gould, Third Edition. Boston: Hilliard, Gray & Co. 1835.

Poems; Translated and Original. By Mrs. E. F. Ellet. Philadelphia: Key and Biddle. 1835.

Mrs. Sigourney has been long known as an author. Her earliest publication was reviewed about twenty years ago, in the North American. She was then Miss Huntley. The fame which she has since acquired is extensive; and we, who so much admire her virtues and her talents, and who have so frequently expressed our admiration of both in this Journal — we, of all persons — are the least inclined to call in question the justice or the accuracy of the public opinion, by which has been adjudged to her so high a station among the literati of our land. Some things, however, we cannot pass over in silence. There are two kinds of popular reputation, — or rather there are two roads by which such reputation may be attained: and it appears to us an idiosyncrasy which distinguishes mere fame from most, or perhaps from all other human ends, that, in regarding the intrinsic value of the object, we must not fail to introduce, as a portion of our estimate, the means by which the object is acquired. To speak less abstractedly. Let us suppose two writers having a reputation apparently equal — that is to say, their names being equally in the mouths of the people — for we take this to be the most practicable test of what we choose to term apparent popular reputation. Their names then are equally in the mouths of the people. The one has written a great work — let it be either an Epic of high rank, or something which, although of seeming littleness in itself, is yet, like the Christabelle of Coleridge, entitled to be called great from its power of creating intense emotion in the minds of great men. And let us imagine that, by this single effort, the author has attained a certain quantum of reputation. We know it to be possible that another writer of very moderate powers may build up for himself, little by little, a reputation equally great — and this, too, merely by keeping continually in the eye, or by appealing continually with little things, to the ear, of that great, overgrown, and majestical gander, the critical and bibliographical rabble.

It would be an easy, although perhaps a somewhat disagreeable task, to point out several of the most popular writers in America — popular in the above mentioned sense — who have manufactured for themselves a celebrity by the very questionable means, and in the very questionable manner, to which we have alluded. But it must not be thought that we wish to include Mrs. Sigourney in the number. By no means. She has trod, however, upon the confines of their circle. She does not owe her reputation to the chicanery we mention, but it cannot be denied that it has been thereby greatly assisted. In a word — no single piece which she has written, and not even her collected works as we behold them in the present volume, and in the one published some years ago, would fairly entitle her to that exalted rank which she actually enjoys as the authoress, time after time, of her numerous, and, in most instances, very creditable compositions. The validity of our objections to this adventitious notoriety we must be allowed to consider unshaken, until it can be proved that any multiplication of zeros will eventuate in the production of a unit.

We have watched, too, with a species of anxiety and vexation brought about altogether by the sincere interest we take in Mrs. Sigourney, the progressive steps by which she has at length acquired the title of the “American Hemans.” Mrs. S. cannot conceal from her own discernment that she has acquired this title solely by imitation. The very phrase “American Hemans” speaks loudly in accusation: and we are grieved that what by the over-zealous has been intended as complimentary should fall with so ill-omened a sound into the ears of the judicious. We will briefly point out those particulars in which Mrs. Sigourney stands palpably convicted of that sin which in poetry is not to be forgiven.

And first, in the character of her subjects. Every unprejudiced observer must be aware of the almost identity between the subjects of Mrs. Hemans and the subjects of Mrs. Sigourney. The themes of the former lady are the unobtrusive happiness, the sweet images, the cares, the sorrows, the gentle affections, of the domestic hearth — these too are the themes of the latter. The Englishwoman has dwelt upon all the “tender and true” chivalries of passion — and the American has dwelt as unequivocally upon the same. Mrs. Hemans has delighted in the radiance of a pure and humble faith — she has looked upon nature with a speculative attention — she has “watched the golden array of sunset clouds, with an eye looking beyond them to the habitations of the disembodied spirit” — she has poured all over her verses the most glorious and lofty aspirations of a redeeming Christianity, and in all this she is herself glorious and lofty. And all this too has Mrs. Sigourney not only attempted, but accomplished — yet in all this she is but, alas! — an imitator.

And secondly — in points more directly tangible than the one just mentioned, and therefore more easily appreciated by the generality of readers, is Mrs. Sigourney again open to the charge we have adduced. We mean in the structure of her versification — in the peculiar turns of her phraseology — in certain habitual expressions (principally interjectional,) such as yea! alas! and many others, so frequent upon the lips of Mrs. Hemans as to give an almost ludicrous air of similitude to all articles of her composition — in an invincible inclination to apostrophize every object, in both moral and physical existence — and more particularly in those mottos or quotations, sometimes of considerable extent, prefixed to nearly every poem, not as a text for discussion, nor even as an intimation of what is to follow, but as the actual subject matter itself, and of which the verses ensuing are, in most instances, merely a paraphrase. These were all, in Mrs. Hemans, mannerisms of a gross and inartificial nature; but, in Mrs. Sigourney, they are mannerisms of the most inadmissible kind — the mannerisms of imitation.

In respect to the use of the quotations, we cannot conceive how the fine taste of Mrs. Hemans could have admitted the practice, or how the good sense of Mrs. Sigourney could have thought it for a single moment worthy of her own adoption. In poems of magnitude the mind of the reader is not, at all times, enabled to include in one comprehensive survey the proportions and proper adjustment of the whole. He is pleased — if at all — with particular passages; and the sum of his pleasure is compounded of the sums of the pleasurable sensations inspired by these individual passages during the progress of perusal. But in pieces of less extent — like the poems of Mrs. Sigourney — the pleasure is unique, in the proper acceptation of that term — the understanding is employed, without difficulty, in the contemplation of the picture as a whole — and thus its effect will depend, in a very great degree, upon the perfection of its finish, upon the nice adaptation of its constituent parts, and especially upon what is rightly termed by Schlegel, the unity or totality of interest. Now it will readily be seen, that the practice we have mentioned as habitual with Mrs. Hemans and Mrs. Sigourney is utterly at variance with this unity. By the initial motto — often a very long one — we are either put in possession of the subject of the poem; or some hint, historic fact, or suggestion is thereby afforded, not included in the body of the article, which, without the suggestion, would be utterly incomprehensible. In the latter case, while perusing the poem, the reader must revert, in mind at least, to the motto for the necessary explanation. In the former, the poem being a mere paraphrase of the motto, the interest is divided between the motto and the paraphrase. In either instance the totality of effect is annihilated.

Having expressed ourselves thus far in terms of nearly unmitigated censure, it may appear in us somewhat equivocal to say that, as Americans, we are proud — very proud of the talents of Mrs. Sigourney. Yet such is the fact. The faults which we have already pointed out, and some others which we will point out hereafter, are but dust in the balance, when weighed against her very many and distinguishing excellences. Among those high qualities which give her, beyond doubt, a title to the sacred name of poet are an acute sensibility to natural loveliness — a quick and perfectly just conception of the moral and physical sublime — a calm and unostentatious vigor of thought — a mingled delicacy and strength of expression — and above all, a mind nobly and exquisitely attuned to all the gentle charities and lofty pieties of life.

The volume whose title forms the heading of this article embraces one hundred and seventy-three poems. The longest, but not the best, of these is Zinzendorff. “It owes its existence,” says the author, “to a recent opportunity of personal intercourse with that sect of Christians who acknowledge Zinzendorff as their founder; and who, in their labors of self-denying benevolence, and their avoidance of the slight, yet bitter causes of controversy, have well preserved that sacred test of discipleship ‘to love one another.’ “ Most of the other pieces were “suggested by the passing and common incidents of life,” — and we confess that we find no fault, with their “deficiency in the wonderful and wild.” Not in these mountainous and stormy regions — but in the holy and quiet valley of the beautiful, must forever consent to dwell the genius of Mrs. Sigourney.

The poem of Zinzendorff includes five hundred and eighty lines. It relates, in a simple manner, some adventures of that man of God. Many passages are very noble, and breathe the truest spirit of the Muse. At page 14, for example.

—————— The high arch
Of the cloud-sweeping forest proudly cast (casts)
A solemn shadow, for no sound of axe
Had taught the monarch Oak dire principles
Of Revolution, or brought down the Pine
Like haughty baron from his castled height.
Thus dwelt the kings of Europe — ere the voice
Of the crusading monk, with whirlwind tone
Did root them from their base, with all their hosts,
Tossing the red-cross banner to the sky.
Again at page 21, we have something equally beautiful, in a very different way. The passage is however much injured by the occurrence of the word ‘that’ at the commencement of both the sixth and seventh line.

———— Now the infant morning raised
Her rosy eyelids. But no soft breeze moved
The forest lords to shake the dews of sleep
From their green coronals. The curtaining mist
Hung o’er the quiet river, and it seemed
That Nature found the summer night so sweet
That ‘mid the stillness of her deep repose
She shunned the wakening of the king of day.
All this is exquisite, and in Zinzendorff there are many passages of a like kind. The poem, however, is by no means free from faults. In the first paragraph we have the following:

———— Through the breast
Of that fair vale the Susquehannah roam’d,
Wearing its robe of silver like a bride.
Now with a noiseless current gliding slow,
Mid the rich velvet of its curtaining banks
It seemed to sleep.
To suppose the Susquehannah roaming through the breast of any thing — even of a valley — is an incongruity: and to say that such false images are common, is to say very little in their defence. But when the noble river is bedizzened out in robes of silver, and made to wash with its bright waters nothing better than curtains of velvet, we feel a very sensible and a very righteous indignation. We might have expected such language from an upholsterer, or a marchande des modes, but it is utterly out of place upon the lips of Mrs. Sigourney. To liken the glorious objects of natural loveliness to the trappings and tinsel of artificiality, is one of the lowest, and at the same time, one of the most ordinary exemplifications of the bathos. At page 21, these verses occur:

No word was spoke,
As when the friends of desolated Job,
Finding the line of language all too short
To fathom woe like his, sublimely paid
That highest homage at the throne of grief,
Deep silence.
The image here italicized is striking, but faulty. It is deduced not from any analogy between actual existences — between woe on the one hand, and the sea on the other — but from the identity of epithet (deep) frequently applied to both. We say the “deep sea,” and the expression “deep woe” is certainly familiar. But in the first case the sea is actually deep; in the second, woe is but metaphorically so. Sound, therefore — not sense, is the basis of the analogy, and the image is consequently incorrect.

Some faults of a minor kind we may also discover in Zinzendorff. We dislike the use made by the poetess of antique modes of expression — here most unequivocally out of place. For example.

Where the red council-fire
Disturbed the trance of midnight, long they sate.
 
What time, with hatred fierce and unsubdued,
The woad-stained Briton, in his wattled boat,
Qualied ’neath the glance of Rome.
The versification of Zinzendorff is particularly good — always sweet — occasionally energetic. We are enabled to point out only one defective line in the poem, and in this the defect has arisen from an attempt to contract enthusiasm into a word of three syllables.

He who found
This blest enthusiasm nerve his weary heart.
There are, however, some errors of accentuation — for example:

So strong in that misanthrope’s bosom wrought
A frenzied malice.
Again —

He would have made himself
A green oasis mid the strife of tongues.
We observe too that Mrs. Sigourney places the accent in Wyoming on the second syllable.

’Twas summer in Wyoming. Through the breast, &c.
———— And the lore
Of sad Wyoming’s chivalry, a part
Of classic song.
But we have no right to quarrel with her for this. The word is so pronounced by those who should know best. Campbell, however, places the accent on the first syllable.

On Susquehannah’s banks, fair Wyoming!
We will conclude our remarks upon Zinzendorff with a passage of surpassing beauty, energy, and poetic power. Why cannot Mrs. Sigourney write always thus?

———— Not a breath
Disturbed the tide of eloquence. So fixed
Were that rude auditory, it would seem
Almost as if a nation had become
Bronzed into statues. Now and then a sigh,
The unbidden messenger of thought profound,
Parted the lip; or some barbarian brow
Contracted closer in a haughty frown,
As scowled the cynic, ‘mid his idol fanes,
When on Mars-Hill the inspired Apostle preached
Jesus of Nazareth.
These lines are glowing all over with the true radiance of poetry. The image in italics is perfect. Of the versification, it is not too much to say that it reminds us of Miltonic power. The slight roughness in the line commencing “When on Mars-Hill,” and the discord introduced at the word “inspired,” evince an ear attuned to the delicacies of melody, and form an appropriate introduction to the sonorous and emphatic closing — Jesus of Nazareth.

Of the minor poems in the volume before us, we must be pardoned for speaking in a cursory manner. Of course they include many degrees of excellence. Their beauties and their faults are, generally, the beauties and the faults of Zinzendorff. We will particularize a few of each.

On page 67, in a poem entitled Female Education, occur the following lines:

———— Break Oblivion’s sleep,
And toil with florist’s art
To plant the scenes of virtue deep
In childhood’s fruitful heart!
To thee the babe is given,
Fair from its glorious Sire;
Go — nurse it for the King of Heaven,
And He will pay the hire.
The conclusion of this is bathetic to a degree bordering upon the grotesque.

At page 160 is an error in metre — of course an oversight. We point it out merely because, did we write ourselves, we should like to be treated in a similar manner. For ‘centred’ we should probably read ‘con centred.’

The wealth of every age
Thou hast center’d here,
The ancient tome, the classic page,
The wit, the poet, and the sage,
All at thy nod appear.
At page 233, line 10, the expression “Thou wert their friend,” although many precedents may be found to justify it — is nevertheless not English. The same error occurs frequently in the volume.

The poem entitled The Pholas, at page 105, has the following introductory prose sentence: “It is a fact familiar to Conchologists, that the genus Pholas possesses the property of phosphorescence. It has been asserted that this may be restored, even when the animal is in a dried state, by the application of water, but is extinguished by the least quantity of brandy.” This odd fact in Natural History is precisely what Cowley would have seized with avidity for the purpose of preaching therefrom a poetical homily on Temperance. But that Mrs. Sigourney should have thought herself justifiable in using it for such purpose, is what we cannot understand. What business has her good taste with so palpable and so ludicrous a conceit? Let us now turn to a more pleasing task.

In the Friends of Man, (a poem originally published in our own Messenger,) the versification throughout is of the first order of excellence. We select an example.

The youth at midnight sought his bed,
But ere he closed his eyes,
Two forms drew near with gentle tread,
In meek and saintly guise;
One struck a lyre of wondrous power,
With thrilling music fraught,
That chained the flying summer hour,
And charmed the listener’s thought —
For still would its tender cadence be
Follow me! follow me!
And every morn a smile shall bring,
Sweet as the merry lay I sing.
The lines entitled Filial Grief, at page 199, are worthy of high praise. Their commencement is chaste, simple, and altogether exquisite. The verse italicized contains an unjust metaphor, but we are forced to pardon it for the sonorous beauty of its expression.

The love that blest our infant dream,
That dried our earliest tear,
The tender voice, the winning smile,
That made our home so dear,
The hand that urged our youthful thought
O’er low delights to soar,
Whose pencil wrote upon our souls,
Alas, is ours no more.
We will conclude our extracts with “Poetry” from page 57. The burden of the song finds a ready echo in our bosoms.

Morn on her rosy couch awoke,
Enchantment led the hour,
And Mirth and Music drank the dews
That freshened Beauty’s flower —
Then from her bower of deep delight
I heard a young girl sing,
“Oh, speak no ill of Poetry,
For ’tis a holy thing!”
 
The sun in noon-day heat rose high,
And on with heaving breast
I saw a weary pilgrim toil,
Unpitied and unblest —
Yet still in trembling measures flow’d
Forth from a broken string,
“Oh, speak no ill of Poetry,
For ’tis a holy thing!”
 
’Twas night, and Death the curtains drew,
Mid agony severe,
While there a willing spirit went
Home to a glorious sphere ——
Yet still it sighed, even when was spread
The waiting Angel’s wing,
“Oh, speak no ill of Poetry,
For ’tis a holy thing!”
We now bid adieu to Mrs. Sigourney — yet we trust only for a time. We shall behold her again. When that period arrives, having thrown aside the petty shackles which have hitherto enchained her, she will assume, at once, that highest station among the poets of our land which her noble talents so well qualify her for attaining.

————
The remarks which we made in the beginning of our critique on Mrs. Sigourney, will apply, in an equal degree, to Miss Gould. Her reputation has been greatly assisted by the frequency of her appeals to the attention of the public. The poems (one hundred and seventeen in number,) included in the volume now before us have all, we believe, appeared, from time to time, in the periodicals of the day. Yet in no other point of view, can we trace the remotest similarity between the two poetesses. We have already pointed out the prevailing characteristics of Mrs. Sigourney. In Miss Gould we recognize, first, a disposition, like that of Wordsworth, to seek beauty where it is not usually sought — in the homelinesses (if we may be permitted the word,) and in the most familiar realities of existence — secondly abandon of manner — thirdly a phraseology sparkling with antithesis, yet, strange to say, perfectly simple and unaffected.

Without Mrs. Sigourney’s high reach of thought, Miss Gould surpasses her rival in the mere vehicle of thought — expression. “Words, words, words,” are the true secret of her strength. Words are her kingdom — and in the realm of language, she rules with equal despotism and nonchalance. Yet we do not mean to deny her abilities of a higher order than any which a mere logocracy can imply. Her powers of imagination are great, and she has a faculty of inestimable worth, when considered in relation to effect — the faculty of holding ordinary ideas in so novel, and sometimes in so fantastic a light, as to give them all of the appearance, and much of the value, of originality. Miss Gould will, of course, be the favorite with the multitude — Mrs. Sigourney with the few.

We can think of no better manner of exemplifying these few observations, than by extracting part of Miss G’s little poem, The Great Refiner.

’Tis sweet to feel that he, who tries
The silver, takes his seat
Beside the fire that purifies;
Lest too intense a heat,
Raised to consume the base alloy,
The precious metal too destroy.
 
’Tis good to think how well he knows
The silver’s power to bear
The or deal to which it goes;
And that with skill and care,
He’ll take it from the fire, when fit
For his own hand to polish it.
 
’Tis blessedness to know that he
The piece he has begun
Will not forsake, till he can see,
To prove the work well done,
An image by its brightness shown
The perfect likeness of his own.
The mind which could conceive the subject of this poem, and find poetic appropriateness in a forced analogy between a refiner of silver, over his crucible, and the Great Father of all things, occupied in the mysteries of redeeming Grace, we cannot believe a mind adapted to the loftier breathings of the lyre. On the other hand, the delicate finish of the illustration, the perfect fitness of one portion for another, the epigrammatic nicety and point of the language, give evidence of a taste exquisitely alive to the prettinesses of the Muse. It is possible that Miss Gould has been led astray in her conception of this poem by the scriptural expression, “He shall sit as a refiner and purifier of silver.”

From the apparently harsh strictures we have thought it our duty to make upon the poetry of Miss Gould, must be excepted one exquisite little morceau at page 59 of the volume now under review. It is entitled The Dying Storm. We will quote it in full.

I am feeble, pale and weary,
And my wings are nearly furled;
I have caused a scene so dreary,
I am glad to quit the world!
With bitterness I’m thinking
On the evil I have done,
And to my caverns sinking
From the coming of the sun.
 
The heart of man will sicken
In that pure and holy light,
When he feels the hopes I’ve stricken
With an everlasting blight!
For widely, in my madness,
Have I poured abroad my wrath,
And changing joy to sadness,
Scattered ruin on my path.
 
Earth shuddered at my motion,
And my power in silence owns;
But the deep and troubled ocean
O’er my deeds of horror moans!
I have sunk the brightest treasure —
I’ve destroyed the fairest form —
I have sadly filled my measure,
And am now a dying storm.
We have much difficulty in recognizing these verses as from the pen of Miss Gould. They do not contain a single trace of her manner, and still less of the prevailing features of her thought. Setting aside the flippancy of the metre, ill adapted to the sense, we have no fault to find. All is full, forcible, and free from artificiality. The personification of the storm, in its perfect simplicity, is of a high order of poetic excellence — the images contained in the lines italicized, all of the very highest.

———
Many but not all of the poems in Mrs. Ellet’s volume, likewise, have been printed before — appearing, within the last two years, in different periodicals. The whole number of pieces now published is fifty seven. Of these thirty-nine are original. The rest are translations from the French of Alphonse de Lamartine and Beranger — from the Spanish of Quevedo and Yriarte — from the Italian of Ugo Foscolo, Alfieri, Fulvio Testi, Pindemonte, and Saverio Bettinelli, — and from the German of Schiller. As evidences of the lady’s acquaintance with the modern languages, these translations are very creditable to her. Where we have had opportunities of testing the fidelity of her versions by reference to the originals, we have always found reason to be satisfied with her performances. A too scrupulous adherence to the text is certainly not one of her faults — nor can we yet justly call her, in regard to the spirit of her authors, a latitudinarian. We wish, however, to say that, in fully developing the meaning of her originals, she has too frequently neglected their poetical characters. Let us refer to the lady’s translation of the Swallows. We have no hesitation in saying, that not the slightest conception of Pierre Jean de Beranger, can be obtained by the perusal of the lines at page 112, of the volume now before us.

Bring me, I pray — an exile sad —
Some token of that valley bright,
Where in my sheltered childhood glad,
The future was a dream of light.
Beside the gentle stream, where swell
Its waves beneath the lilac tree,
Ye saw the cot I love so well —
And speak ye of that home to me?
We have no fault to find with these verses in themselves — as specimens of the manner of the French chansonnier, we have no patience with them. What we have quoted, is the second stanza of the song. Our remarks, here, with some little modification, would apply to the Sepulchres of Foscolo, especially to the passage commencing

Yes — Pindemonte!
The aspiring soul is fired to lofty deeds
By great men’s monuments, &c.
They would apply, also, with somewhat less force, to Lamartine’s Loss of the Anio, in the original of which by the way, we cannot perceive the lines answering to Mrs. E’s verses

All that obscures thy sovereign majesty
Degrades our glory in degrading thee.
Quevedo’s Sonnet Rome in Ruins, we happen to have by us at this moment. The translation in this instance is faultless, and combines, happily, a close approximation to the meaning of the original, with its quaint air and pompous rhythm. The Sonnet itself is a plagiarism entire, from Girolamo Preti. The opening lines of Quevedo,

Pilgrim! in vain thou seekest in Rome for Rome!
Alas! the Queen of nations is no more!
Dust are her towers, that proudly frowned of yore,
And her stern hills themselves have built their tomb,
are little else than the

Roma in Roma non è
In se stessa cadeo morta e sepolta, &c.
of Girolamo. But this is no concern of Mrs. Ellet’s.

Of the original poems, which form the greater part of the volume, we have hardly been able to form an opinion, during the cursory perusal we have given them. Some of them have merit. Some we think unworthy of the talents which their author has undoubtedly displayed. The epigram, for example, at page 102 is rather a silly joke upon a threadbare theme, and, however well it might have suited Mrs. Ellet’s purpose to indite it, she should have had more discretion than to give it permanency in a collection of her poems.

Echo was once a love sick maid
They say: the tale is no deceiver.
However a woman’s form might fade
Her voice would be the last to leave her!
The tragedy (Teresa Contarini) at the end of the volume, “is founded,” says the authoress, “upon an incident well known in the history of Venice, which has formed the material for various works of fiction.” Mrs. E. has availed herself of a drama of Nicolini’s in part of the first scene of the first act, and in the commencement of the fifth act. The resemblance between the two plays is, however, very slight. In plot — in the spirit of the dialogue — and in the range of incidents they differ altogether. Teresa Contarini was received with approbation at the Park Theatre in March 1835, — Miss Philips performing the heroine. We must confine ourselves to the simple remark, that the drama appears to us better suited to the closet than the stage.

In evidence that Mrs. Ellet is a poetess of no ordinary rank, we extract, from page 51 of her volume, a little poem rich in vigorous expression, and full of solemn thought. Its chief merits, however, are condensation and energy.

Hark — to the midnight bell!
The solemn peal rolls on
That tells us, with an iron tongue,
Another year is gone!
Gone with its hopes, its mockeries, and its fears,
To the dim rest which wraps our former years.
 
Gray pilgrim to the past!
We will not bid thee stay;
For joys of youth and passion’s plaint
Thou bear’st alike away.
Alike the tones of mirth, and sorrow’s swell
Gather to hymn thy parting. — Fare thee well!
 
Fill high the cup — and drink
To Time’s unwearied sweep!
He claims a parting pledge from us —
And let the draught be deep!
We may not shadow moments fleet as this,
With tales of baffled hopes, or vanished bliss.
 
No comrade’s voice is here,
That could not tell of grief —
Fill up! — We know that friendship’s hours,
Like their own joys — are brief.
Drink to their brightness while they yet may last,
And drown in song the memory of the past!
 
The winter’s leafless bough
In sunshine yet shall bloom;
And hearts that sink in sadness now
Ere long dismiss their gloom.
Peace to the sorrowing! Let our goblets flow,
In red wine mantling, for the tears of wo!
 
Once more! A welcoming strain!
A solemn sound — yet sweet!
While life is ours, Time’s onward steps
In gladness will we greet!
Fill high the cup! What prophet lips may tell
Where we shall bid another year farewell!
With this extract, we close our observations on the writings of Mrs. Ellet — of Miss Gould — and of Mrs. Sigourney. The time may never arrive again, when we shall be called upon, by the circumstances of publication, to speak of them in connexion with one another.

 

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞

Notes:

None.


∞∞∞∞∞∞∞
[S:0 - SLM, 1836] - Edgar Allan Poe Society of Baltimore - Works - Criticism - Criticial Notices (January 1836)

Last Update: June 28, 2013   Navigation:  Main Menu    Poe’s Works    Poe’s Criticism
Text: Edgar Allan Poe, “Review of A Wreath of Wild Flowers from New England and Poems” [Text-02], Godey’s Lady’s Book, vol. XXXII, no. 3, March 1846, pp. 134-139

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞

[page 134, full page:]

LITERARY CRITICISM.

BY EDGAR A. POE.

[column 1:]

A WREATH OF WILD FLOWERS FROM NEW ENGLAND. By Frances Sargent Osgood. Second Edition. London: Edward Churton, Cavendish Square. 1842.

POEMS. By Frances Sargent Osgood. New York: Clark & Austin. 1846.

FOR the last five or six years the name of Frances S. Osgood has been a household word with the readers of our magazines; and perhaps no one of their contributors has been so universally popular. She has written for these works quite as much prose as poetry — but then the prose has been poetry itself. Mrs. Osgood was born a poetess only — it is not in her nature to be anything else. Her personal, not less than her literary character and existence are one perpetual poem.

With the carelessness which seems a portion of such character, she has done herself gross injustice by failing to take proper care of the children of her delicate fancy, by suffering them to run wild, unheeded and forgotten by herself, so that many of them are perhaps irrecoverably lost.

The “Wreath of Wild Flowers from New England” was, we believe, the first collection of her poems. It was published in London during the author’s residence in that city, and was received with very unequivocal marks of approbation, both by the public and the critics. There was that about the volume, that inexpressible grace of thought and manner, which never fails to find ready echo in the hearts of the aristocracy and refinement of Great Britain; and it was here especially that Mrs. Osgood found welcome. “The London Court Journal,” “La Belle Assemblee,” “The London Court and Ladies’ Magazine,” “The New Monthly,” “The London Monthly Chronicle,” “The Despatch,” “The Atlas,” “The Literary Gazette,” and other similar journals, were lavish in their approbation, and the fair American authoress grew at once into high favour with the fashionable literati and the literary fashionables of England.

Indeed, the reception which Mrs. Osgood met in that country of conventionalities, in that hot-bed of literary prejudice, was not more indicative of her real merit than remarkable for its strong contrast with the treatment there ordinarily vouchsafed to American authorship. In her case, if in none other since the days of Irving and Cooper, there seemed to exist a disposition among the critics to be pleased with the intrinsically pleasurable without reference to the trans-Atlantic origin of the pleasure. Nor, in the notices with which the papers of the day abounded, was there observable any of that mere praise, for praise sake, with which the British Aristarchuses sometimes condescend to insult us. In general, the criticisms were discriminative, and gave evidence of the truth of intention

“We have been long familiar,” says the high authority of the “Literary Gazette,” “with the name of our fair author, and felt assured that when she launched forth her beautiful thoughts in the shape of a volume, we should find much to amuse the mind and amend the heart. Our expectations have been fulfilled, and we have here a delightful gathering of the sweetest of wild flowers, all looking as fresh and beautiful as if they had grown in the richest of English pasture in place of having been

‘Nursed by the cataract.”
True, the wreath might have been improved with a tattle more care, a trifling attention or two paid to the formation of it; a stalk here and there that obtrudes itself between the bells of the flowers, might have become so interwoven as to have been concealed, and the whole have looked as if it had grown in that perfect and beautiful form. Though, after all, we are perhaps too chary; for in Nature every leaf is not ironed out to a form, nor propped up with a wiry precision, but blown and ruffled by the refreshing breezes, and looking as careless and easy and unaffected as a child, that bounds along with its silken locks tossed to and fro just as the wind uplifts them. Page after page of this volume have we perused with a feeling of pleasure and admiration.”

The poems included in the edition thus spoken of, were chiefly the compositions of the author’s earliest youth, and were, indeed, justly chargeable with that careless abandonment of manner which the Gazette rebukes — an abandonment which, although it may be adduced as a fault in a poem considered absolutely, is, nevertheless, so usually an indication of the vigour, the wealth — in a word — of the genius of the poet.

The comments of “The Times” were somewhat different in tone, and although marked in commendation, appeared to be written with some reluctance. Its passages of more decided praise had all the air of being extorted. “Among these poems,” it said, “are many displaying much nervousness of thought, much delicacy of feeling and much sprightliness. The author has touched upon all subjects, ‘from gay to grave, from lively to severe,’ and affords us a very good specimen that Brother Jonathan possesses a little more civilization [page 135:] and refinement than Mrs. Trollope would give him credit for. There are many of the shorter pieces which would do no discredit to the works of our best poets.”

The “Court Journal” more emphatically says — “Her wreath is one of violets, sweet-scented, pure and modest; so lovely, that the hand that wove it should not neglect additionally to enrich it by turning her love and kindness to things of larger beauty. Some of the smaller lyrics in the volume are perfectly beautiful” — “beautiful in their chaste and exquisite simplicity, and the perfect elegance of their composition.”

The volume here referred to has not been reprinted in this country, and is, therefore, comparatively little known to American readers. It opens with “Elfrida, a Dramatic Poem, in five acts,” the subject being the deception practiced upon Edgar, King of England, by Athelwood, who, when commissioned by the monarch to ascertain personally the truth or falsehood of the reports touching Elfrida’s beauty, becomes himself enamoured, and, representing her to Edgar as uncouth and disagreeable, finally woos and weds her in his own person — giving her great wealth as his reason to the king. The theme is an unusually fine one, and Mrs. Osgood, with her deep feeling and exquisite taste, could not fail to do much with it. Her artistic skill, however, seems to have been, at the period of composing this play, insufficient for the construction of a true drama, and accordingly, as a drama, we find “Elfrida “ faulty in the extreme. Its situations are ultra-romantic, or improbable, and its incidents inconsequential, seldom furthering the business of the play. The character of Elfrida, however, is portrayed with great force, and, viewing the work as a “dramatic poem,” in accordance with its title, it may be said to have unquestionable merit. We cull a few passages at random.

“I saw her on her bridal day, my liege,
In all the pomp and splendour of her charms;
So regal in her loveliness — so proud!
Her brown and braided hair was lighted up
With flashing gems, as is the night with stars.
Her cheek at first might seem a thought too pale;
Her dark rich eyes too wild and strangely sad;
But, at a whisper from her young kinswoman,
Lo! to that cheek a gleam of rosy fire,
Like summer lightning, came, and to her eye
A smile that mocked the diamond on her brow.
Her bosom heaved beneath its gorgeous vest
Of broidered silk; then with impatient air
She bit her lip — her arched and glowing lip —
And straight grew calm again — as still and pale,
And mute as sculptured marble.”
  * * * * * * * *  
“Oh, fair Elfrida, thou hast cost me dear,
And were it not that danger’s self is sweet
When brav’d for thee, I could have cursed these eyes
That saw thee beautiful, and this fond heart
That felt thee pure and therefore worshiped thee.”
  * * * * * * * * *  
In the depicting the impassioned ambition of Elfrida, the authoress seems especially at home; and upon this character she has evidently put forth [column 2:] her strength. There is a fine feeling blending of the poetry of passion and the passion of poetry in the lines which follow:

“Why, even now he bends
In courtly reverence to some mincing dame,
Haply the star of Edgar’s festival;
While I, with this high heart and queenly form,
Pine in neglect and solitude. Shall it be?
Shall I not rend my fetters and be free?
Ay! — be the cooing turtle-dove content,
Safe in own loved nest; — the eagle soars
On restless plumes to meet the imperial sun.
And Edgar is my day-star, in whose light
This heart’s proud wings shall yet be furled to rest.
Why wedded I with Athelwood? For this?
To pace, day after day, the same dull round
With some half-dozen maidens for my train?
No! Even at the altar when I stood —
My hand in his, his gaze upon my cheek —
I did forget his presence and the scene.
A gorgeous vision rose before mine eyes
Of power and pomp and regal pageantry;
A king was at my feet, and, as he knelt,
I smiled, and turning, met — a husband’s kiss!
But still I smiled, for in my guilty soul
I blessed him as the being by whose means
I should be brought within my idol’s sphere —
My haughty, glorious, brave, impassioned Edgar!
Well I remember when these wondering eyes
Beheld him first — I was a maiden then,
A dreaming child — but from that thrilling hour,
I’ve been a queen in visions!”
Very similar, but even more glowing, is the love-inspired eloquence of Edgar —

“Earth hath no language, love, befitting thee!
For its own children it hath pliant speech,
And mortals know to call a blossom fair,
A wavelet graceful and a jewel rich —
But thou! oh, teach me, sweet, the angel-tongue
They talked in heaven, ere thou didst leave its bowers
To bloom below!
To this Elfrida replies —

“If Athelwood should hear thee!”
Edgar says —

“Name not the felon knave to me, Elfrida;
My soul is flamed whene’er I think of him.
Thou lov’st him not? Oh, say thou cost not love him!”
The answer of Elfrida, at this point, is profoundly true to nature, and would alone suffice to assure us of the dramatic talent which Mrs. Osgood has so long permitted to lie perdu —

“When but a child I saw thee in my dream.”
The woman’s soul here shrinks from the direct avowal of want of love for her husband, and flies to poetry, and appeals to fate, by way of excusing that infidelity which is at once her glory and her shame.

The dénouement of the drama is comparatively feeble, and its moral of very equivocal tendency, indeed — but we do not hold it the office of either poetry or of the drama to inculcate truth or virtue, unless incidentally. An old adage avows that “there is a time for all things,” and another should [page 136:] be invented forthwith (is it not discoverable in Tupper?) to the effect that everything should be accomplished by the means best adapted to its accomplishment. The object of poetry in general, is beauty — the object of the drama, which has nothing to do with poetry, unless through the introduction of a poetical character, is the portraiture of nature in human action and earthly incident. But, as the landscape of the artist (who deserves the name) must be superior in its “composition,” in its arrangement of forms and colours, to any landscape actually existing, so the drama, while never losing sight of nature’s general intention, should surpass nature herself in its combination of events with character — rejecting all that is not in itself dramatically picturesque or in full consonance with the effect or impression upon the audience which is intended by the dramatist. Now, the conveying of what is absurdly termed, “a moral,” is a thing entirely apart from these considerations, and should be left to the essayist and the preacher. Those who uphold the value, in a moral point of view, of such absurdities as “George Barnwell,” seem to us strangely paradoxical in their demands and expectations. “George Barnwell” is applauded for its “moral” — that is to say, for the impressiveness with which it conveys the truth that dissipation leads to crime and crime to punishment; but we are at a loss to understand how this truth, or how any truth can be conveyed by that which is in itself confessedly a lie. Does the fact that a dramatist invented a ,fiction that one George Barnwell was hung for robbing his uncle, tend to prove in any way that every man who robs his uncle will actually be hung? It is not in the power of any fiction to inculcate any truth. The truthfulness, the indispensable truthfulness of the drama, has reference only to the fidelity with which it should depict nature, so far as regards her points, first, and secondly, her general intention. Her arrangement or combination of points may be improved — that is to say, a greater number of striking points than are ever seen closely conjoined in reality, may, for artistical purposes be gathered into the action of a drama — provided always that there be no absolute controversion of nature’s general intention. But all this is very different from the inculcation of truth. The drama, in a word, must be truthful without conveying the true — just as the brain, although the seat of sensation, is nearly, if not altogether, insensible itself.

We repeat, that Mrs. Osgood in “Elfrida “ has given evidence of unusual dramatic power, although she has as unquestionably failed in writing a good play. The great tragic element, passion, breathes in every line of her composition, and had she but the art, or the patience to model or to control it, she might, if she thought proper, be eminently successful as a playwright.

We are justified in these opinions by what we see, not only in “Elfrida,” but in “Woman’s Trust, a Dramatic Sketch,” included, also, in the English edition.

The “Miscellaneous Poems” of the volume — some of them written at a very early age — are, of course, various in character and in merit. Their prevailing traits are grace, delicacy, and passionate expression; and these are, in general, the predominant features of the poetess. In the first-named quality — in grace — Mrs. Osgood is unrivaled. About everything she writes we perceive this indescribable and incomprehensible charm — a charm of which the elements are, perhaps, a vivid fancy and a keen sense of the proportionate. A thorough relish for grace in itself — as evinced, for instance, in a wave, in a curl, in the petal of a flower, in the motion of a child or of a dancer — is readily perceptible in the soul of the poetess. In fact, whatever be her theme, she immediately extorts from it and expresses its whole principle of grace. Fanny Ellsler has been lauded ad ininitum, but we look in vain for anything written in her praise which at the same time so distinctly and vividly depicts her to the eye and evinces so thorough an appreciation of her merit, as the half-dozen quatrains which follow. They are taken from a poem entitled, “Letter to an Absent Friend.”

“She comes! the spirit of the dance!
And but for those large eloquent eyes,
Where passion speaks in every glance,
She’d seem a wanderer from the skies.
 
“So light, that, gazing breathless there,
Lest the celestial dream should go,
You’d think the music in the air
Waved the fair vision to and fro.
 
“Or that the melody’s sweet f low
Within the radiant creature played
And those soft wreathing arms of snow
And white sylph feet the music made.
 
“ Now gliding slow with dreamy grace,
Her eyes beneath their lashes lost,
Now motionless with lifted face,
And small hands on her bosom crossed.
 
“And now, with flashing eyes, she springs,
Her whole bright figure raised in air,
As if her soul had spread its wings
And poised her one wild instant there.
 
“She spoke not; but so richly fraught
With language are her glance and smile,
That given the curtain fell, I thought
She had been talking all the while.”
This is, indeed, poetry, and of the most unquestionable kind — poetry truthful in the proper sense — that is to say, breathing of nature. There is nothing forced or artificial, no hardly-sustained enthusiasm. The poetess speaks because she feels, and what she feels — but what she feels is felt only by the truly poetical.

The little poem commencing “Your heart is a music-box, dearest,” is no doubt already familiar to many of our readers, but we must quote it here in farther exemplification of the trait to which we allude. [page 137:]

“Your heart is a music-box, dearest,
With exquisite tunes at command,
Of melody sweetest and clearest
If tried by a delicate hand;
But its workmanship, love, is so fine,
At a single rude touch it would break:
Then, oh, be the magic key mine
Its fairy-like whispers to wake!
And there’s one little tune it can play
That I fancy all others above —
You learned it of Cupid one day —
It begins with and ends with ‘I love, I love,’
It begins with and ends with ‘I love!’ ”
The melody and harmony of this little bifou are absolutely perfect, and there is in it a rich tint of that epigrammatism which we had almost forgotten to mention as one of our poet’s idiosyncrasies. Some of the intentional epigrams interspersed throughout these volumes are the happiest we have ever met. Here is one which, while replete with the rarest and richest “spirit of point,” is yet something more than pointed. We have never believed, hitherto, that anything of true dignity could be imparted to this species of composition.

TO AN ATHEIST POET.

“Lov’st thou the music of the sea?
Call’st thou the sunshine bright?
His voice is more than melody —
His smile is more than light.”
Here, again, is something very similar —

“Fanny shuts her smiling eyes,
Then, because she cannot see:
Thoughtless simpleton — she cries,
‘Ah, you can’t see me!’ ”
 
“Fanny’s like the sinner vain,
Who, with spirit shut and dim,
Thinks, because he sees not Heaven,
Heaven beholds not him.”
“The Boy Painter,” with the motto, “My mother’s kiss made me a painter,” quoted from the “Life of Benjamin West,” may be cited as a happy exemplification of all the characteristics we have specified.

“A little heart where slept the germ, as yet in night concealed,
Of power and glory since to be (how radiantly!) revealed,
Alone, beside a cradle bed, was beating fast and warm,
Where, beautiful in slumber, lay a baby’s dimpled form.
 
“The infant smiled in sleep, and, lo! a little ardent hand,
Ere fled the smile, had snatched a pen and paper from the stand,
And traced the cradle and the babe, as if by magic spell;
How soft, beneath that tiny touch, the fairy features fell!
 
“How fondly o’er the playful sketch he bends — the enraptured boy —
Unmindful of his precious charge, so deep his dream of joy!
’Tis broken by a stealing step — his mother caught the prize,
And kissed away the cloud of doubt that filled his timid eyes. [column 2:]
Oh, blessed love! how mighty thou to sway the human heart!
A subtle yet a holy thing and conqueror thou art!
His sister’s smile awoke the germ, his mother’s kiss the flower,
And a world’s tears the fruit embalm in many a classic bower.”
It is remarkable that “The Boy Painter,” which is especially “correct,” in the French sense — that is to say, especially perfect in the minor morals of composition — is included among the “Juvenile Rhymes” of the volume. Many of the best pieces are here found.

In lines of badinage, or, more properly, of archness or espieglerie Mrs. Osgood seems particularly at home. We have seldom seen anything better in this way than the song entitled

“IF HE CAN.

“Let me see him once more
For a moment or two;
Let him tell me himself
Of his purpose, dear, do!
Let him gaze in these eyes
While he lays out his plan
To escape me, and then
He may go — if he can!
 
“Let me see him once more;
Let me give him one smile
Let me breathe but one word
Of endearment the while:
I ask but that moment —
My life on the man!
Does he think to forget me?
He may if he can! “
“The Unexpected Declaration” is, perhaps, even a finer specimen of the same manner. It is one of that class of poems which Mrs. Osgood has made emphatically her own province. Had we seen it without her name, we should not have had the slightest difficulty in ascribing it to her; for there is no other poet — in America, certainly — who can do anything of a similar kind with anything like a similar skill.

“THE UNEXPECTED DECLARATION.

“ ‘Azure-eyed Eloise! beauty is thine;
Passion kneels to thee and calls thee divine;
Minstrels awaken the lute with thy name;
Poets have gladdened the world with thy fame;
Painters half holy thy loved image keep;
Beautiful Eloise, why do you weep?’
 
“Still bows the lady her light tresses low —
Fast the warm tears from her veiled eyes flow.
 
“ ‘Sunny-haired Eloise! wealth is shine own;
Rich is thy silken robe, bright is thy zone;
Proudly the jewel illumines thy way;
Clear rubies rival thy ruddy lips’ play;
Diamonds like star-drops thy silken braids deck;
Pearls waste their snow on thy lovelier neck;
Luxury softens thy pillow for sleep —
Angels watch over it — why do you weep?”
 
“Still bows the lady her light tresses low —
Faster the tears from her veiled eyes flow.  [page 138:]
 
“ ‘Gifted and worshipped one! genius and grace
Play in each motion and beam in thy face.
When from thy rosy lip rises the song,
Hearts that adore thee the echo prolong.
Ne’er in the festival shone an eye brighter;
Ne’er in the mazy dance fell a foot lighter; —
One only spirit thou’st failed to bring down —
Exquisite Eloise! why do you frown?”
 
“Swift o’er her forehead a dark shadow stole,
Sent from the tempest of pride in her soul.
 
“ ‘Touched by thy sweetness, in love with thy grace,
Charmed with the magic of mind in thy face;
Bewitched by thy beauty, e’en his haughty strength,
The strength of the stoic, is conquered at length.
Lo, at thy feet see him kneeling the while!
Eloise — Eloise, why do you smile!’
 
“The hand was withdrawn from her happy blue eyes;
She gazed on her lover in laughing surprise;
While the dimple and blush, stealing soft to her cheek,
Told the tale that her tongue was too timid to speak.”
Had we seen only “The Wreath of Wild Flowers from New England,” we should have been forced, in speaking of Mrs. Osgood’s merits, to confine our observations to those salient points on which we have already commented, and which, indeed, constitute her poetical character; or, if we spoke at all of that noblest of all attributes of genius — imagination — we should have contented ourselves with quoting one or two passages such as the following, which we take from “A Sketch” in the “Juvenile Rhymes.”

“For Fancy is a fairy that can hear,
Ever, the melody of Nature’s voice,
And see all lovely visions that she will,
She drew a picture of a beauteous bird,
With plumes of radiant green and gold inwoven,
Banished from its beloved resting place,
and fluttering in vain hope from tree and tree,
And bade us think, like it, the sweet season
From one bright shelter to another fled.
First from the maple waved her emerald pinions,
But lingered still upon the oak and elm,
Till, frightened by rude breezes even from them,
With mournful sigh, she moaned her sad farewell.”
We might also have made some extracts from a “Fragment of a Fairy Romance,” included likewise in the “Juvenile Rhymes,” and decidedly one of the most meritorious poems in the collection; but we should have regarded these things rather as accidents or exceptions, and have made up our mind that our authoress is deficient in ideality. The volume lately published, however, by Messrs. Clark & Austin, gives an entirely different complexion to our estimate of her abilities. A few additional years, with their inevitably attendant sorrow, seem to have stirred up the depths of her soul with those of her heart, and we now see at once the whole power of the poet. “The Spirit of Poetry,” “To Sybil,” “The Birth of the Callitriche,” and “The Child and its Angel Playmate,” are specimens of imaginative poetry which would do honour to the noblest poets of the day; while the pieces entitled “ She Loves him [column 2:] Yet,” “ Aspirations,” “Lenore,” “The World-worn Lyre,” and a song beginning “Yes, Lower to the Level,” breathe a passionate sadness, of which, from any indication afforded by the earlier volume, it would have been difficult to believe the author susceptible. And yet the selections in the later edition have been either hastily or injudiciously made, for a great many of Mrs. Osgood’s very finest poems (“The Daughter of Herodias,” for example) are omitted. We presume, however, that “The Daughter of Herodias” and some other of the best of the omitted pieces, will be included in Dr. Griswold’s seventh edition of the “Poets and Poetry of America.”

From “The Wreath of Wild Flowers from New England,” we have not scrupled to make copious extracts in the course of this notice, for the reason that the volume is comparatively unknown to the readers of this magazine; but, as the later volume is, by this time, widely circulated in America, we must content ourselves with quoting from it only a couple of the shorter poems. We select those which differ most essentially in character and manner from the composition already cited.

“SHE LOVES HIM YET.

“She loves him yet!
I know by the blush that rises
Beneath the curls
That shadow her soul-lit cheek.
She loves him yet!
Through all Love’s sweet disguises
In timid girls
A blush will be sure to speak.
 
“But deeper signs
Than the radiant blush of beauty
The maiden finds
Whenever his name is heard:
Her young heart thrills,
Forgetting herself, her duty;
Her dark eye fills,
And her pulse with hope is stirred.
 
“She loves him yet!
The flower the false one gave her
When last he came,
Is still with her wild tears wet
She’ll ne’er forget
However his faith may waver.
Through grief and shame,
Believe it, she loves him yet!
 
“His favorite songs
She will sing — she heeds no other.
With all her wrongs
Her life on his love is set.
Ah, doubt no more —
She never can wed another.
Till life be o’er,
She loves — she will love him yet!”
There is a terse energy of expression about this little song which very forcibly impresses us, and the skill of its versification is remarkable. But even more noticeable, for these same qualities, is the noble poem which follows. [page 139:]

“Yes, lower to the level
Of those who laud thee now!
Go, join the joyous revel,
And pledge the heartless vow!
Go, dim the soul-born beauty
That lights that lofty brow!
Fill, fill the bowl — let burning wine
Drown in thy soul love’s dream divine!
 
“Yet when the laugh is lightest,
When wildest flies the jest,
When gleams the goblet brightest,
And proudest heaves thy breast,
And thou art madly pledging
Each gay and jovial guest —
A ghost shall glide amidst the flowers,
The shade of love’s departed hours!
 
“And thou shalt shrink in sadness
From all the splendour there,
And curse the revel’s gladness,
And hate the banquet’s glare,
And pine, ’mid passion’s madness,
For true love’s purer air,
And feel thou ‘dst give their wildest glee
For one unsullied sigh from me.
 
“Yet deem not this my prayer, love,
Ah, no! if I could keep
Thy altered heart from care, love,
And charm its griefs to sleep,
Mine only should despair, love,
I, I alone would weep —
I, I alone would mourn the flowers
That bloom in love’s deserted bowers.” [column 2:]
So far we have spoken nearly altogether of the merits of Mrs. Osgood. Her defects are by no means numerous, and are chiefly of a negative character. The epigrammatism of her conclusions gives to her poems, as wholes, the air of being more skilfully constructed than they really are. They will not bear examination, except at points or in detail. Her imagery is often mixed — indeed, it is rarely otherwise. Her versification is sometimes exceedingly good, sometimes uncouth, through the too frequent introduction of harsh consonants, and the employment of such words as “thou’dst” for “thou wouldst,” with other unnecessary contractions, inversions, and obsolete expressions.

Comparing her with American poetesses, we should not venture to speak of her as the equal of Mrs. Maria Brooks in imagination and vigour, nor of Mrs. Amelia Welby in passionate tenderness and rhythmical skill, but there is no other cis-Atlantic poetess to whom we consider her, even at these points, inferior. In fancy, as contradistinguished from imagination proper, in delicacy of taste, in refinement generally, in naïveté, in point, and, above all, in that inexpressible charm of charms which, for want of a better term or a more sufficient analysis than at present exists, we are accustomed to designate as grace, she is absolutely without a rival, we think, either in our own country or in England.

 


∞∞∞∞∞∞∞

Notes:

None.

 

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞
[S:0 - GLB, 1846] - Edgar Allan Poe Society of Baltimore - Works - Criticism - Review of A Wreath of Wild Flowers from New England and Poems [Text-02]

Last Update: August 2, 2015   Navigation:  Main Menu    Poe’s Works    Poe’s Misc.    Editorial Policies    Searching    WORKS:  Prev Pages   Next Pages
Text: Edgar Allan Poe, “The Literati [part 05]” (Text-D), The Works of the Late Edgar Allan Poe (1850), 3:87-112

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞

[page 87:]

[[~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~]]

FRANCES SARGENT OSGOOD.

MRS. OSGOOD, for the last three or four years, has been rapidly attaining distinction; and this, evidently, with no effort at attaining it. She seems, in fact, to have no object in view beyond that of giving voice to the fancies or the feelings of the moment. “Necessity,” says the proverb, “is the mother of Invention;” and the invention of Mrs. O., at least, springs plainly from necessity — from the necessity of invention. Not to write poetry — not to act it, think it, dream it, and be it, is entirely out of her power.

It may be questioned whether with more industry, more method, more definite purpose, more ambition, Mrs. Osgood would have made a more decided impression on the public mind. She might, upon the whole, have written better poems; but the chances are that she would have failed in conveying so vivid and so just an idea of her powers as poet. The warm abandonnement of her style — that charm which now so captivates — is but a portion and a consequence of her unworldly nature — of her disregard of mere fame; but it affords us glimpses, which we could not otherwise have obtained, of a capacity for accomplishing what she has not accomplished, and in all probability never will. In the world of poetry, however, there is already more than enough of uncongenial ambition and pretence.

Mrs. Osgood has taken no care whatever of her literary fame. A great number of her finest compositions, both in verse and prose, have been written anonymously, and are now lying perdus about the country, in out-of-the way nooks and corners. Many a goodly reputation has been reared upon a far more unstable basis than her unclaimed and uncollected “fugitive pieces.”

Her first volume, I believe, was published, seven or eight years ago, by Edward Churton, of London, during the residence of the poetess in that city. I have now lying before me a second edition of it, dated 1842 — a beautifully printed book, dedicated to the Reverend Hobart Caunter. It contains a number of what the Bostonians call “juvenile”’ poems, written when Mrs. O., (then [page 88:] Miss Locke,) could not have been more than thirteen, and evincing unusual precocity. The leading piece is “Elfrida, a Dramatic Poem,” but in many respects well entitled to the appellation, “drama.” I allude chiefly to the passionate expression of particular portions, to delineation of character, and to occasional scenic effect: — in construction, or plot — in general conduct and plausibility, the play fails; comparatively, of course — for the hand of genius is evinced throughout.

The story is the well known one of Edgar, Elfrida, and Earl Athelwood. The king, hearing of Elfrida’s extraordinary beauty, commissions his favorite, Athelwood, to visit her and ascertain if report speaks truly of her charms. The earl, becoming himself enamored, represents the lady as anything but beautiful or agreeable. The king is satisfied. Athelwood soon afterward woos and weds Elfrida — giving Edgar to understand that the heiress’ wealth is the object. The true state of the case, however, is betrayed by an enemy; and the monarch resolves to visit the earl at his castle and to judge for himself. Hearing of this resolve, Athelwood, in despair, confesses to his wife his duplicity, and entreats her to render null as far as possible the effect of her charms by dressing with unusual plainness. This the wife promises to do; but, fired with ambition and resentment at the wrong done her, arrays herself in her most magnificent and becoming costume. The king is charmed, and the result is the destruction of Athelwood and the elevation of Elfrida to the throne.

These incidents are well adapted to dramatic purposes, and with more of that art which Mrs. Osgood does not possess, she might have woven them into a tragedy which the world would not willingly let die. As it is, she has merely succeeded in showing what she might, should, and could have done, and yet, unhappily, did not.

The character of Elfrida is the bright point of the play. Her beauty and consciousness of it — her indignation and uncompromising ambition — are depicted with power. There is a fine blending of the poetry of passion and the passion of poetry, in the lines which follow:

—— Why even now he bends
In courtly reverence to some mincing dame, [page 89:]
Haply the star of Edgar’s festival,
While I, with this high heart and queenly form,
Pine in neglect and solitude. Shall it be?
Shall I not rend my fetters and be free?
Ay! — be the cooing turtle-dove content,
Safe in her own loved nest! — the eagle soars
On restless plumes to meet the imperial sun.
And Edgar is my day-star in whose light
This heart’s proud wings shall yet be furled to rest.
Why wedded I with Athelwood? For this?
No! — even at the altar when I stood —
My hand in his, his gaze upon my cheek —
I did forget his presence and the scene;
A gorgeous vision rose before mine eyes
Of power and pomp and regal pageantry;
A king was at my feet and, as he knelt,
I smiled and, turning, met — a husband’s kiss.
But still I smiled — for in my guilty soul
I blessed him as the being by whose means
I should be brought within my idol’s sphere —
My haughty, glorious, brave, impassioned Edgar!
Well I remember when these wondering eyes
Beheld him first. I was a maiden then —
A dreaming child — but from that thrilling hour
I’ve been a queen in visions!
Very similar, but even more glowing, is the love-inspired eloquence of Edgar.

Earth hath no language, love, befitting thee,
For its own children it hath pliant speech;
And mortals know to call a blossom fair,
A wavelet graceful, and a jewel rich;
But thou! — oh, teach me, sweet, the angel tongue
They talked in Heaven ere thou didst leave its bowers
To bloom below!
To this Elfrida replies:

If Athelwood should hear thee!
And to this, Edgar:

Name not the felon knave to me, Elfrida!
My soul is flame whene’er I think of him.
Thou lovest him not? — oh, say thou dost not love him!
The answer of Elfrida at this point is profoundly true to nature, and would alone suffice to assure any critic of Mrs. Osgood’s dramatic talent:

When but a child I saw thee in my dreams!
The woman’s soul here shrinks from the direct avowal of want of love for her husband, and flies to poetry and appeals to fate, [page 90:] by way of excusing that infidelity which is at once her glory and her shame.

In general, the “situations” of “Elfrida” are improbable or ultra-romantic, and its incidents unconsequential, seldom furthering the business of the play. The dénouement is feeble, and its moral of very equivocal tendency indeed — but I have already shown that it is the especial office neither of poetry nor of the drama, to inculcate truth, unless incidentally. Mrs. Osgood, however, although she has unquestionably failed in writing a good play, has, even in failing, given indication of dramatic power. The great tragic element, passion, breathes in every line of her composition, and had she but the art, or the patience, to model or control it, she might be eminently successful as a playwright. I am justified in these opinions not only by “Elfrida,” but by “Woman’s Trust, a Dramatic Sketch,” included, also, in the English edition.

A Masked Ball. Madelon and a Stranger in a Recess.
 
Mad. — Why hast thou led me here?
My friends may deem it strange — unmaidenly,
This lonely converse with an unknown mask.
Yet in thy voice there is a thrilling power
That makes me love to linger. It is like
The tone of one far distant — only his
Was gayer and more soft.
 
Strang.   Sweet Madelon!
Say thou wilt smile upon the passionate love
That thou alone canst waken! Let me hope!
 
Mad. — Hush! hush! I may not hear thee. Know’st thou not I am betrothed?
 
Strang. — Alas! too well I know;
But I could tell thee such a tale of him —
Thine early love — ‘twould fire those timid eyes
With lightning pride and anger — curl that lip —
That gentle lip to passionate contempt
For man’s light falsehood. Even now he bends —
Thy Rupert bends o’er one as fair as thou,
In fond affection. Even now his heart —
 
Mad. — Doth my eye flash? — doth my lip curl with scorn?
‘Tis scorn of thee, thou perjured stranger, not —
Oh, not of him, the generous and the true!
Hast thou e’er seen my Rupert? — hast thou met
Those proud and fearless eyes that never quailed,
As Falsehood quails, before another’s glance —
As thine even now are shrinking from mine own — [page 91:]
The spirit beauty of that open brow —
The noble head — the free and gallant step —
The lofty mien whose majesty is won
From inborn honor — hast thou seen all this?
And darest thou speak of faithlessness and him
In the same idle breath? Thou little know’st
The strong confiding of a woman’s heart,
When woman loves as — I do. Speak no more!
 
Strang. — Deluded girl! I tell thee he is false —
False as yon fleeting cloud!
 
Mad.   True as the sun!
 
Strang. — The very wind less wayward than his heart!
 
Mad. — The forest oak less firm! He loved me not
For the frail rose-hues and the fleeting light
Of youthful loveliness — ah, many a cheek
Of softer bloom, and many a dazzling eye
More rich than mine may win my wanderer’s gaze.
He loved me for my love, the deep, the fond —
For my unfaltering truth; he cannot find —
Rove where he will — a heart that beats for him
With such intense, absorbing tenderness —
Such idolizing constancy as mine.
Why should he change, then? — I am still the same.
 
Strang. — Sweet infidel! wilt thou have ruder proof?
Rememberest thou a little golden case
Thy Rupert wore, in which a gem was shrined?
A gem I would not barter for a world —
An angel face; its sunny wealth of hair
In radiant ripples bathed the graceful throat
And dimpled shoulders; round the rosy curve
Of the sweet mouth a smile seemed wandering ever;
While in the depths of azure fire that gleamed
Beneath the drooping lashes, slept a world
Of eloquent meaning, passionate yet pure —
Dreamy — subdued — but oh, how beautiful!
A look of timid, pleading tenderness
That should have been a talisman to charm
His restless heart for aye. Rememberest thou?
 
Mad. — (impatiently.) I do — I do remember — ‘twas my own.
He prized it as his life — I gave it him —
What of it! — speak!
 
Strang. — (showing a miniature,) Lady, behold that gift!
 
Mad — (clasping her hands) Merciful Heaven! is my Rupert dead?
(After a pause, during which she seems overwhelmed with agony)
How died he? — when? — oh, thou wast by his side
In that last hour and I was far away!
My blessed love! — give me that token! — speak!
What message sent he to his Madelon?
 
Strang. — (Supporting her and strongly agitated,)
He is not dead, dear lady! — grieve not thus! [page 92:]
 
Mad. — He is not false, sir stranger!
 
Strang.   For thy sake,
Would he were worthier! One other proof
I’ll give thee, loveliest! if thou lov’st him still,
I’ll not believe thee woman. Listen, then!
A faithful lover breathes not of his bliss
To other ears. Wilt hear a fable, lady?
Here the stranger details some incidents of the first wooing of Madelon by Rupert, and concludes with,

Lady, my task is o’er — dost doubt me still?
 
Mad.    Doubt thee, my Rupert! ah, I know thee now.
Fling by that hateful mask! — let me unclasp it!
No! thou wouldst not betray thy Madelon.
The “Miscellaneous Poems” of the volume — many of them written in childhood — are, of course, various in character and merit. “The Dying Rosebud’s Lament,” although by no means one of the best, will very well serve to show the earlier and most characteristic manner of the poetess:

Ah, me! — ah wo is me
That I should perish now,
With the dear sunlight just let in
Upon my balmy brow.
 
My leaves, instinct with glowing life,
Were quivering to unclose:
My happy heart with love was rife —
I was almost a rose.
 
Nerved by a hope, warm, rich, intense,
Already I had risen
Above my cage’s curving fence —
My green and graceful prison,
 
My pouting lips, by Zephyr pressed,
Were just prepared to part,
And whispered to the wooing wind
The rapture of my heart.
 
In new-born fancies revelling,
My mossy cell half riven,
Each thrilling leaflet seemed a wing
To bear me into Heaven.
 
How oft, while yet an infant-flower,
My crimson cheek I’ve laid
Against the green bars of my bower,
Impatient of the shade.
 
And, pressing up and peeping through
Its small but precious vistas,
Sighed for the lovely light and dew
That blessed my elder sisters. [page 93:]
 
I saw the sweet breeze rippling o’er
Their leaves that loved the play,
Though the light thief stole all the store
Of dew-drop gems away.
 
I thought how happy I should be
Such diamond wreaths to wear,
And frolic with a rose’s glee
With sunbeam, bird and air.
 
Ah, me! — ah, wo is me, that I,
Ere yet my leaves unclose,
With all my wealth of sweets must die
Before I am a rose!
The poetical reader will agree with me that few things have ever been written (by any poet, at any age,) more delicately fanciful than the passages italicised — and yet they are the work of a girl not more than fourteen years of age. The clearness and force of expression, and the nice appositeness of the overt and insinuated meaning, are, when we consider the youth of the writer, even more remarkable than the fancy.

I cannot speak of Mrs. Osgood’s poems without a strong propensity to ring the changes upon the indefinite word “grace” and its derivatives. About everything she writes we perceive this indescribable charm — of which, perhaps, the elements are a vivid fancy and a quick sense of the proportionate. Grace, however, may be most satisfactorily defined as “a term applied, in despair, to that class of the impressions of Beauty which admit of no analysis.” It is in this irresoluble effect that Mrs. Osgood excels any poetess of her country — and it is to this easily appreciable effect that her popularity is owing. Nor is she more graceful herself than a lover of the graceful, under whatever guise it is presented to her consideration. The sentiment renders itself manifest, in innumerable instances, as well throughout her prose as her poetry. Whatever be her theme, she at once extorts from it its whole essentiality of grace. Fanny Ellsler has been often lauded; true poets have sung her praises; but we look in vain for anything written about her, which so distinctly and vividly paints her to the eye as the half dozen quatrains which follow. They are to be found in the English volume:

She comes! — the spirit of the dance!
And but for those large [[,]] eloquent eyes, [page 94:]
Where Passion speaks in every glance,
She’d seem a wanderer from the skies.
 
So light that, gazing breathless there,
Lest the celestial dream should go,
You’d think the music in the air
Waved the fair vision to and fro,
 
Or think the melody’s sweet flow
Within the radiant creature played,
And those soft wreathing arms of snow
And white sylph feet the music made.
 
Now gliding slow with dreamy grace,
Her eyes beneath their lashes lost,
Now motionless, with lifted face,
And small hands on her bosom crossed.
 
And now with flashing eyes she springs —
Her whole bright figure raised in air,
As if her soul had spread its wings
And poised her one wild instant there!
 
She spoke not — but, so richly fraught
With language are her glance and smile,
That, when the curtain fell, I thought
She had been talking all the while.
This is, indeed, poetry — and of the most unquestionable kind — poetry truthful in the proper sense — that is to say, breathing of Nature. There is here nothing forced or artificial — no hardly sustained enthusiasm. The poetess speaks because she feels, and what she feels; but then what she feels is felt only by the truly poetical. The thought in the last line of the quatrain will not be so fully appreciated by the reader as it should be; for latterly it has been imitated, plagiarized, repeated ad infinitum: — but the other passages italicized have still left them all their original effect. The idea in the two last lines is exquisitely näive and natural; that in the two last lines of the second quatrain, beautiful beyond measure; that of the whole fifth quatrain, magnificent — unsurpassed in the entire compass of American poetry. It is instinct with the noblest poetical requisite — imagination.

Of the same trait I find, to my surprise, one of the best exemplifications among the “Juvenile Rhymes.”

For Fancy is a fairy that can hear,
Ever, the melody of Nature’s voice
And see all lovely visions that she will.
She drew a picture of a beauteous bird
With plumes of radiant green and gold inwoven, [page 95:]
Banished from its beloved resting place,
And fluttering in vain hope from tree to tree,
And bade us think how, like it, the sweet season
From one bright shelter to another fled —
First from the maple waved her emerald pinions,
But lingered still upon the oak and elm,
Till, frightened by rude breezes even from them,
With mournful sigh she moaned her sad farewell.
The little poem called “The Music Box” has been as widely circulated as any of Mrs. Osgood’s compositions. The melody and harmony of this jeu d’esprit are perfect, and there is in it a rich tint of that epigrammatism for which the poetess is noted. Some of the intentional epigrams interspersed through the works are peculiarly happy. Here is one which, while replete with the rarest “spirit of point,” is yet something more than pointed.

TO AN ATHEIST POET.
 
Lovest thou the music of the sea?
Callest thou the sunshine bright?
HIS voice is more than melody —
HIS smile is more than light.
Here [[,]] again, is something very similar:

Fanny shuts her smiling eyes,
Then because she cannot see,
Thoughtless simpleton! she cries
“Ah! you can’t see me.”
 
Fanny’s like the sinner vain
Who, with spirit shut and dim,
Thinks, because he sees not Heaven,
Heaven beholds not him.
Is it not a little surprising, however, that a writer capable of so much precision and finish as the author of these epigrams must be, should have failed to see how much of force is lost in the inversion of “the sinner vain?” Why not have written “Fanny’s like the silly sinner?” — or, if “silly” be thought too jocose, “the blinded sinner?” The rhythm, at the same time, would thus be much improved by bringing the lines,

Fanny’s like the silly sinner,
Thinks because he sees not Heaven,
into exact equality.

In mingled epigram and espieglerie Mrs. Osgood is even more especially at home. I have seldom seen anything in this way more happily done than the song entitled “If He Can.”

“The Unexpected Declaration” is, perhaps, even a finer specimen [page 96:] of the same manner. It is one of that class of compositions which Mrs. Osgood has made almost exclusively her own. Had I seen it without her name, I should have had no hesitation in ascribing it to her; for there is no other person — in America certainly — who does anything of a similar kind with anything like a similar piquancy.

The point of this poem, however, might have been sharpened, and the polish increased in lustre, by the application of the emory of brevity. From what the lover says much might well have been omitted; and I should have preferred leaving out altogether the autorial comments; for the story is fully told without them. The “‘Why do you weep?” “Why do you frown?” and “Why do you smile?” supply all the imagination requires; to supply more than it requires, oppresses and offends it. Nothing more deeply grieves it — or more vexes the true taste in general, than hyperism of any kind. In Germany, Wohlgeborn is a loftier title than Edelgeborn; and in Greece, the thrice-victorious at the Olympic games could claim a statue of the size of life, while he who had conquered but once was entitled only to a colossal one.

The English collection of which I speak was entitled “A Wreath of Wild Flowers from New England.” It met with a really cordial reception in Great Britain — was favorably noticed by the “Literary Gazette,” “Times,” “Atlas,” “Monthly Chronicle,” and especially by the “Court Journal,” “The Court and Ladies’ Magazine,” “La Belle Assemblée,” and other similar works. “We have long been familiar,” says the high authority of the “Literary Gazette,” “with the name of our fair author. . . . . . Our expectations have been fulfilled, and we have here a delightful gathering of the sweetest of wild flowers, all looking as fresh and beautiful as if they had grown in the richest of English pasture in place of having been ‘nursed by the cataract.’ True, the wreath might have been improved with a little more care — a trifling attention or two paid to the formation of it. A stalk here and there that obtrudes itself between the bells of the flowers, might have become so interwoven as to have been concealed, and the whole have looked as if it had grown in that perfect and beautiful form. Though, after all, we are perhaps too chary; for in Nature every leaf is not ironed out to a form, nor propped up with a wiry precision, but blown and ruffled by the [page 97:] refreshing breezes, and looking as careless and easy and unaffected as a child that bounds along with its silken locks tossed to and fro just as the wind uplifts them. Page after page of this volume have we perused with a feeling of pleasure and admiration.” The “Court Journal” more emphatically says: — “ Her wreath is one of violets, sweet-scented, pure and modest; so lovely that the hand that wove it should not neglect additionally to enrich it by turning her love and kindness to things of larger beauty. Some of the smaller lyrics in the volume are perfectly beautiful — beautiful in their chaste and exquisite simplicity and the perfect elegance of their composition.” In fact, there was that about “The Wreaths of Wild Flowers” — that inexpressible grace of thought and manner — which never fails to find ready echo in the hearts of the aristocracy and refinement of Great Britain; — and it was here especially that Mrs. Osgood found welcome. Her husband’s merits as an artist had already introduced her into distinguished society, (she was petted, in especial, by Mrs. Norton and Rogers,) but the publication of her poems had at once an evidently favorable effect upon his fortunes. His pictures were placed in a most advantageous light by her poetical and conversational ability.

Messrs. Clarke and Austin, of New York, have lately issued another, but still a very uncomplete [[incomplete]] collection of “Poems by Frances S. Osgood.” In general, it includes by no means the best of her works. “The Daughter of Herodias” — one of her longest compositions, and a very noble poem, putting me in mind of the best efforts of Mrs. Hemans — is omitted: — it is included, however, in the last edition of Doctor Griswold’s “Poets and Poetry of America.” In Mrs. [[Messrs.]] C. and A.’s collection there occur, too, very many of those half sentimental, half allegorical compositions of which, at one period, the authoress seemed to be particularly fond — for the reason, perhaps, that they afforded her good opportunity for the exercise of her ingenuity and epigrammatic talent: — no poet, however, can admit them to be poetry at all. Still, the volume contains some pieces which enable us to take a new view of the powers of the writer. A few additional years, with their inevitable sorrow, appear to have stirred the depths of her heart. We see less of frivolity — less of vivacity — more of tenderness — earnestness — even passion — and far more of the true imagination [page 98:] as distinguished from its subordinate, fancy. The one prevalent trait, grace, alone distinctly remains. “The Spirit of Poetry,” “To Sybil,” “The Birth of the Callitriche,” and “The Child and its Angel-Playmate,” would do honor to any of our poets. “She Loves Him Yet,” nevertheless, will serve, better than either of these poems, to show the alteration of manner referred to. It is not only rhythmically perfect, but it evinces much originality in its structure. The verses commencing, “Yes, lower to the level,” are in a somewhat similar tone, but are more noticeable for their terse energy of expression.

In not presenting to the public at one view all that she has written in verse, Mrs. Osgood has incurred the risk of losing that credit to which she is entitled on the score of versatility — of variety in invention and expression. There is scarcely a form of poetical composition in which she has not made experiment; and there is none in which she has not very happily succeeded. Her defects are chiefly negative and by no means numerous. Her versification is sometimes exceedingly good, but more frequently feeble through the use of harsh consonants, and such words as “thou’dst “ for “thou wouldst,” with other unnecessary contractions, inversions, and obsolete expressions. Her imagery is often mixed; — indeed it is rarely otherwise. The epigrammatism of her conclusions gives to her poems, as wholes, the air of being more skilfully constructed than they really are. On the other hand, we look in vain throughout her works for an offence against the finer taste, or against decorum — for a low thought or a platitude. A happy refinement — an instinct of the pure and delicate — is one of her most noticeable excellencies. She may be properly commended, too, for originality of poetic invention, whether in the conception of a theme or in the manner of treating it. Consequences of this trait are her point and piquancy. Fancy and näiveté appear in all she writes. Regarding the loftier merits, I am forced to speak of her in more measured terms. She has occasional passages of true imagination — but scarcely the glowing, vigorous, and sustained ideality of Mrs. Maria Brooks — or even, in general, the less ethereal elevation of Mrs. Welby. In that indescribable something, however, which, for want of a more definite term, we are accustomed to call “grace” — that charm so [page 99:] magical, because at once so shadowy and so potent — that Will o’ the Wisp which, in its supreme development, may be said to involve nearly all that is valuable in poetry — she has, unquestionably, no rival among her countrywomen.

Of pure prose — of prose proper — she has, perhaps, never written a line in her life. Her usual magazine papers are a class by themselves. She begins with a resolute effort at being sedate — that is to say, sufficiently prosaic and matter-of-fact for the purpose of a legend or an essay; but, after a few sentences, we behold uprising the leaven of the Muse; then, with a flourish and some vain attempts at repression, a scrap of verse renders itself manifest; then comes a little poem outright; then another and another and another, with impertinent patches of prose in between — until at length the mask is thrown fairly off and far away, and the whole article — sings.

Upon the whole, I have spoken of Mrs. Osgood so much in detail, less on account of what she has actually done than on account of what I perceive in her the ability to do.

In character she is ardent, sensitive, impulsive — the very soul of truth and honor; a worshipper of the beautiful, with a heart so radically artless as to seem abundant in art; universally admired, respected, and beloved. In person, she is about the medium height, slender even to fragility, graceful whether in action or repose; complexion usually pale; hair black and glossy; eyes a clear, luminous grey, large, and with singular capacity for expression.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

LYDIA M. CHILD.

MRS. CHILD has acquired a just celebrity by many compositions of high merit, the most noticeable of which are “Hobomok,” “Philothea,” and a “History of the Condition of Women.” “Philothea,” in especial, is written with great vigor, and, as a classical romance, is not far inferior to the “Anacharsis” of Barthelemi; — its style is a model for purity, chastity and ease. Some of her magazine papers are distinguished for graceful and brilliant imagination — a quality rarely noticed in our countrywomen. [page 100:] She continues to write a great deal for the monthlies and other journals, and invariably writes well. Poetry she has not often attempted, but I make no doubt that in this she would excel. It seems, indeed, the legitimate province of her fervid and fanciful nature. I quote one of her shorter compositions, as well to instance (from the subject) her intense appreciation of genius in others as to exemplify the force of her poetic expression: —

MARIUS AMID THE RUINS OF CARTHAGE.

Pillars are fallen at thy feet,
Fanes quiver in the air,
A prostrate city is thy seat,
And thou alone art there[[.]]
 
No change comes o’er thy noble brow,
Though ruin is around thee;
Thine eyebeam burns as proudly now
As when the laurel crowned thee.
 
It cannot bend thy lofty soul
Though friends and fame depart —
The car of Fate may o’er thee roll
Nor crush thy Roman heart.
 
And genius hath electric power
Which earth can never tame;
Bright suns may scorch and dark clouds lower,
Its flash is still the same.
 
The dreams we loved in early life
May melt like mist away;
High thoughts may seem, ‘mid passion’s strife,
Like Carthage in decay;
 
And proud hopes in the human heart
May be to ruin hurled,
Like mouldering monuments of art
Heaped on a sleeping world;
 
Yet there is something will not die
Where life hath once been fair;
Some towering thoughts still rear on high,
Some Roman lingers there.
Mrs. Child, casually observed, has nothing particularly striking in her personal appearance. One would pass her in the street a dozen times without notice. She is low in stature and slightly framed. Her complexion is florid; eyes and hair are dark; features in general diminutive. The expression of her countenance, when animated, is highly intellectual. Her dress is usually plain, not even neat — anything but fashionable. Her bearing needs excitement [page 101:] to impress it with life and dignity. She is of that order of beings who are themselves only on “great occasions.” Her husband is still living. She has no children. I need scarcely add that she has always been distinguished for her energetic and active philanthropy.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

THOMAS DUNN BROWN [[ENGLISH]].

I HAVE seen one or two scraps of verse with this gentleman’s nom de plume* appended, which had considerable merit. For example:

[[“AZTHENE.”]]

A sound melodious shook the breeze
When thy beloved name was heard:
Such was the music in the word
Its dainty rhythm the pulses stirred
But passed forever joys like these.
There is no joy, no light, no day;
But black despair and night al-way
And thickening gloom:
And this, Azthene, is my doom.
 
Was it for this, for weary years,
I strove among the sons of men,
And by the magic of my pen —
Just sorcery — walked the lion’s den
Of slander void of tears and fears —
And all for thee? For thee! — alas,
As is the image on a glass
So baseless seems,
Azthene, all my earthly dreams.
I must confess, however, that I do not appreciate the “dainty rhythm” of such a word as “Azthene,” and, perhaps, there is some taint of egotism in the passage about “the magic” of Mr. Brown’s pen. Let us be charitable, however, and set all this down under the head of the pure imagination or invention — the first of poetical requisites. The inexcusable sin of Mr. Brown is imitation — if this be not too mild a term. Barry Cornwall, for example, sings about a “dainty rhythm,” Mr. Brown forthwith, in B flat, hoots about it too. He has taken, however, his most unwarrantable liberties in the way of plagiarism, with Mr. [page 102:] Henry B. Hirst, of Philadelphia — a poet whose merits have not yet been properly estimated.

I place Mr. Brown, to be sure, on my list of literary people not on account of his poetry, (which I presume he himself is not weak enough to estimate very highly,) but on the score of his having edited, for several months, “with the aid of numerous collaborators,” a magazine called “The Aristidean.” This work, although professedly a “monthly,” was issued at irregular intervals, and was unfortunate, I fear, in not attaining at any period more than about fifty subscribers.

Mr. Brown has at least that amount of talent which would enable him to succeed in his father’s profession — that of a ferryman on the Schuylkill — but the fate of “The Aristidean” should indicate to him that, to prosper in any higher walk of life, he must apply himself to study. No spectacle can be more ludicrous than that of a man without the commonest school education, busying himself in attempts to instruct mankind on topics of polite literature. The absurdity, in such cases, does not lie merely in the ignorance displayed by the would-be instructor, but in the transparency of the shifts by which he endeavors to keep this ignorance concealed. The “editor of the Aristidean,” for example, was not the public laughing-stock throughout the five months of his magazine’s existence, so much on account of writing “lay” for “lie,” “went” for “gone,” “set” for “sit,” etc. etc., or for coupling nouns in the plural with verbs in the singular — as when he writes, above,

—— so baseless seems,
Azthene, all my earthly dreams —
he was not, I say, laughed at so much on account of his excusable deficiencies in English grammar (although an editor should undoubtedly be able to write his own name) as on account of the pertinacity with which he exposes his weakness, in lamenting the “typographical blunders” which so unluckily would creep into his work. He should have reflected that there is not in all America a proof-reader so blind as to permit such errors to escape him. The rhyme, for instance, in the matter of the “dreams” that “seems,” would have distinctly shown even the most uneducated printers’ devil [page 103:] that he, the devil, had no right to meddle with so obviously an intentional peculiarity.

Were I writing merely for American readers, I should not, of course, have introduced Mr. Brown’s name in this book. With us, grotesqueries such as “The Aristidean” and its editor, are not altogether unparalleled, and are sufficiently well understood — but my purpose is to convey to foreigners some idea of a condition of literary affairs among us, which otherwise they might find it difficult to comprehend or to conceive. That Mr. Brown’s blunders are really such as I have described them — that I have not distorted their character or exaggerated their grossness in any respect — that there existed in New York, for some months, as conductor of a magazine that called itself the organ of the Tyler party, and was even mentioned, at times, by respectable papers, a man who obviously never went to school, and was so profoundly ignorant as not to know that he could not spell — are serious and positive facts — uncolored in the slightest degree — demonstrable, in a word, upon the spot, by reference to almost any editorial sentence upon any page of the magazine in question. But a single instance will suffice: — Mr. Hirst, in one of his poems, has the lines,

Oh Odin! ‘twas pleasure — ‘twas passion to see
Her serfs sweep like wolves on a lambkin like me.
At page 200 of “The Aristidean” for September, 1845, Mr. Brown, commenting on the English of the passage says: — “This lambkin might have used better language than ‘like me’ — unless he intended it for a specimen of choice Choctaw, when it may, for all we know to the contrary, pass muster.” It is needless, I presume, to proceed farther in a search for the most direct proof possible or conceivable, of the ignorance of Mr. Brown — who, in similar cases, invariably writes — “like I.”

In an editorial announcement on page 242 of the same “number,” he says: — “This and the three succeeding numbers brings the work up to January and with the two numbers previously published makes up a volume or half year of numbers.” But enough of this absurdity: — Mr. Brown had, for the motto on his magazine cover, the words of Richelieu,

—— Men call me cruel;
I am not: — I am just [page 104:]
Here the two monosyllables “an ass” should have been appended. They were no doubt omitted through “one of those d——d typographical blunders” which, through life, have been at once the bane and the antidote of Mr. Brown.

I make these remarks in no spirit of unkindness. Mr. B. is yet young — certainly not more than thirty-eight or nine — and might readily improve himself at points where he is most defective. No one of any generosity would think the worse of him for getting private instruction.

I do not personally know him. About his appearance there is nothing very remarkable — except that he exists in a perpetual state of vacillation between mustachio and goatee. In character, a windbeutel.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ELIZABETH BOGART.

MISS BOGART has been for many years before the public as a writer of poems and tales (principally the former) for the periodicals, having made her debût as a contributor to the original “New York Mirror.” Doctor Griswold, in a foot-note appended to one of her poems quoted in his “Poets and Poetry,” speaks of the “volume” from which he quotes; but Miss Bogart has not yet collected her writings in volume form. Her fugitive pieces have usually been signed “Estelle.” They are noticeable for nerve, dignity and finish. Perhaps the four stanzas entitled “He came too Late,” and introduced into Dr. Griswold’s volume, are the most favorable specimen of her manner. Had he not quoted them I should have copied them here.

Miss Bogart is a member of one of the oldest families in the State. An interesting sketch of her progenitors is to be found in Thompson’s “History of Long Island.” She is about the medium height, straight and slender; black hair and eyes; countenance full of vivacity and intelligence. She converses with fluency and spirit, enunciates distinctly, and exhibits interest in whatever is addressed to her — a rare quality in good talkers; has a keen appreciation of genius and of natural scenery; is cheerful and fond of society. [page 105:]

[[~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~]]

CATHERINE M. SEDGWICK.

MISS SEDGWICK is not only one of our most celebrated and most meritorious writers, but attained reputation at a period when American reputation in letters was regarded as a phenomenon; and thus, like Irving, Cooper, Paulding, Bryant, Halleck, and one or two others, she is indebted, certainly, for some portion of the esteem in which she was and is held, to that patriotic pride and gratitude to which I have already alluded, and for which we must make reasonable allowance in estimating the absolute merit of our literary pioneers.

Her earliest published work of any length was “A New England Tale,” designed in the first place as a religious tract, but expanding itself into a volume of considerable size. Its success — partially owing, perhaps, to the influence of the parties for whom or at whose instigation it was written — encouraged the author to attempt a novel of somewhat greater elaborateness as well as length, and “Redwood” was soon announced, establishing her at once as the first female prose writer of her country. It was reprinted in England, and translated, I believe, into French and Italian. “Hope Leslie” next appeared — also a novel — and was more favorably received even than its predecessors. Afterwards came “Clarence,” not quite so successful, and then “The Linwoods,” which took rank in the public esteem with “Hope Leslie.” These are all of her longer prose fictions, but she has written numerous shorter ones of great merit — such as “The Rich Poor Man and the Poor Rich Man,” “Live and Let Live,” (both in volume form,) with various articles for the magazines and annuals, to which she is still an industrious contributor. About ten years since she published a compilation of several of her fugitive prose pieces, under the title “Tales and Sketches,” and a short time ago a series of “Letters from Abroad” — not the least popular or least meritorious of her compositions.

Miss Sedgwick has now and then been nicknamed “the Miss Edgeworth of America;” but she has done nothing to bring down upon her the vengeance of so equivocal a title. That she has [page 106:] thoroughly studied and profoundly admired Miss Edgeworth may, indeed, be gleaned from her works — but what woman has not? Of imitation there is not the slightest perceptible taint. In both authors we observe the same tone of thoughtful morality, but here all resemblance ceases. In the Englishwoman there is far more of a certain Scotch prudence, in the American more of warmth, tenderness, sympathy for the weaknesses of her sex. Miss Edgeworth is the more acute, the more inventive, and the more rigid. Miss Sedgwick is the more womanly.

All her stories are full of interest. The “New England Tale” and “Hope Leslie” are especially so, but upon the whole I am best pleased with “The Linwoods.” Its prevailing features are ease, purity of style, pathos, and verisimilitude. To plot it has little pretension. The scene is in America, and, as the sub-title indicates, “Sixty years since.” This, by-the-by, is taken from “Waverley.” The adventures of the family of a Mr. Linwood, a resident of New York, form the principal theme. The character of this gentleman is happily drawn, although there is an antagonism between the initial and concluding touches — the end has forgotten the beginning, like the government of Trinculo. Mr. L. has two children, Herbert and Isabella. Being himself a Tory, the boyish impulses of his son in favor of the revolutionists are watched with anxiety and vexation; and on the breaking out of the war, Herbert, positively refusing to drink the king’s health, is expelled from home by his father — an event on which hinges the main interest of the narrative. Isabella is the heroine proper, full of generous impulses, beautiful, intellectual, spirituelle — indeed, a most fascinating creature. But the family of a Widow Lee throws quite a charm over all the book — a matronly, pious and devoted mother, yielding up her son to the cause of her country — the son gallant, chivalrous, yet thoughtful; a daughter, gentle, loving, melancholy, and susceptible of light impressions. This daughter, Bessie Lee, is one of the most effective personations to be found in our fictitious literature, and may lay claims to the distinction of originality — no slight distinction where character is concerned. It is the old story, to be sure, of a meek and trusting heart broken by treachery and abandonment, but in the narration of Miss Sedgwick it breaks upon us with all the freshness [page 107:] of novel emotion. Deserted by her lover, an accomplished and aristocratical coxcomb, the spirits of the gentle girl sink gradually from trust to simple hope, from hope to anxiety, from anxiety to doubt, from doubt to melancholy, and from melancholy to madness. The gradation is depicted in a masterly manner. She escapes from her home in New England and endeavors to make her way alone to New York, with the object of restoring to him who had abandoned her, some tokens he had given her of his love — an act which her disordered fancy assures her will effect in her own person a disenthralment from passion. Her piety, her madness, and her beauty, stand her in stead of the lion of Una, and she reaches the city in safety. In that portion of the narrative which embodies this journey are some passages which no mind unimbued with the purest spirit of poetry could have conceived, and they have often made me wonder why Miss Sedgwick has never written a poem.

I have already alluded to her usual excellence of style; but she has a very peculiar fault — that of discrepancy between the words and character of the speaker — the fault, indeed, more properly belongs to the depicting of character itself.

For example, at page 38, vol. 1, of “The Linwoods:” —

“No more of my contempt for the Yankees, Hal, an’ thou lovest me,” replied Jasper. “You remember Æsop’s advice to Crœsus at the Persian court?”

“No, I am sure I do not. You have the most provoking way of resting the lever by which you bring out your own knowledge, on your friend’s ignorance.”

Now all this is pointed, (although the last sentence would have been improved by letting the words “on your friend’s ignorance” come immediately after “resting,”) but it is by no means the language of schoolboys — and such are the speakers.

Again, at page 226, vol. 1, of the same novel: —

“Now, out on you, you lazy, slavish loons!” cried Rose. “Cannot you see these men are raised up to fight for freedom for more than themselves? If the chain be broken at one end, the links will fall apart sooner or later. When you see the sun on the mountain top, you may be sure it will shine into the deepest valleys before long.’ “

Who would suppose this graceful eloquence to proceed from the mouth of a negro woman? Yet such is Rose. [page 108:]

Again, at page 24, vol. 1, same novel: —

“True, I never saw her; but I tell you, young lad, that there is such a thing as seeing the shadow of things far distant and past, and never seeing the realities, though they it be that cast the shadows.’’

Here the speaker is an old woman who, a few sentences before, has been boasting of her proficiency in “tellin’ fortins.”

I might object, too, very decidedly to the vulgarity of such a phrase as “I put in my oar,” (meaning, “I joined in the conversation,”) when proceeding from the mouth of so well-bred a personage as Miss Isabella Linwood. These are, certainly, most remarkable inadvertences.

As the author of many books — of several absolutely bound volumes in the ordinary “novel” form of auld lang syne, Miss Sedgwick has a certain adventitious hold upon the attention of the public, a species of tenure that has nothing to do with literature proper — a very decided advantage, in short, over her more modern rivals whom fashion and the growing influence of the want of an international copyright law have condemned to the external insignificance of the yellow-backed pamphleteering.

We must permit, however, neither this advantage nor the more obvious one of her having been one of our pioneers, to bias the critical judgment as it makes estimate of her abilities in comparison with those of her present cotemporaries. She has neither the vigor of Mrs. Stephens nor the vivacious grace of Miss Chubbuck, nor the pure style of Mrs. Embury, nor the classic imagination of Mrs. Child, nor the naturalness of Mrs. Annan, nor the thoughtful and suggestive originality of Miss Fuller; but in many of the qualities mentioned she excels, and in no one of them is she particularly deficient. She is an author of marked talent, but by no means of such decided genius as would entitle her to that precedence among our female writers which, under the circumstances to which I have alluded, seems to be yielded her by the voice of the public.

Strictly speaking, Miss Sedgwick is not one of the literati of New York city, but she passes here about half or rather more than half her time. Her home is Stockbridge, Massachusetts. Her family is one of the first in America. Her father, Theodore Sedgwick the elder, was an eminent jurist and descended from one of [page 109:] Cromwell’s major-generals. Many of her relatives have distinguished themselves in various ways.

She is about the medium height, perhaps a little below it. Her forehead is an unusually fine one; nose of a slightly Roman curve; eyes dark and piercing; mouth well formed and remarkably pleasant in its expression. The portrait in “Graham’s Magazine” is by no means a likeness, and, although the hair is represented as curled, (Miss Sedgwick at present wears a cap — at least most usually,) gives her the air of being much older than she is.

Her manners are those of a high-bred woman, but her ordinary manner vacillates, in a singular way, between cordiality and a reserve amounting to hauteur.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

LEWIS GAYLORD CLARK.

MR. CLARK is known principally as the twin brother of the late Willis Gaylord Clark, the poet, of Philadelphia, with whom he has often been confounded from similarity both of person and of name. He is known, also, within a more limited circle, as one of the editors of “The Knickerbocker Magazine,” and it is in this latter capacity that I must be considered as placing him among literary people. He writes little himself, the editorial scraps which usually appear in fine type at the end of “The Knickerbocker” being the joint composition of a great variety of gentlemen (most of them possessing shrewdness and talent,) connected with diverse journals about the city of New York. It is only in some such manner, as might be supposed, that so amusing and so heterogeneous a medley of chit-chat could be put together. Were a little more pains taken in elevating the tone of this “Editors’ Table,” (which its best friends are forced to admit is at present a little Boweryish,) I should have no hesitation in commending it in general as a very creditable and very entertaining specimen of what may be termed easy writing and hard reading.

It is not, of course, to be understood from anything I have here said, that Mr. Clark does not occasionally contribute editorial matter to the magazine. His compositions, however, are far from numerous, and are always to be distinguished by their style, [page 110:] which is more “easily to be imagined than described.” It has its merit, beyond doubt, but I shall not undertake to say that either “vigor,” “force” or “impressiveness” is the precise term by which that merit should be designated. Mr. Clark once did me the honor to review my poems, and — I forgive him.

“The Knickerbocker” has been long established, and seems to have in it some important elements of success. Its title, for a merely local one, is unquestionably good. Its contributors have usually been men of eminence. Washington Irving was at one period regularly engaged. Paulding, Bryant, Neal, and several others of nearly equal note have also at various times furnished articles, although none of these gentlemen, I believe, continue their communications. In general, the contributed matter has been praiseworthy; the printing, paper, and so forth, have been excellent, and there certainly has been no lack of exertion in the way of what is termed “putting the work before the eye of the public;” still some incomprehensible incubus has seemed always to sit heavily upon it, and it has never succeeded in attaining position among intelligent or educated readers. On account of the manner in which it is necessarily edited, the work is deficient in that absolutely indispensable element, individuality. As the editor has no precise character, the magazine, as a matter of course, can have none. When I say “no precise character,” I mean that Mr. C., as a literary man, has about him no determinateness, no distinctiveness, no saliency of point; — an apple, in fact, or a pumpkin, has more angles. He is as smooth as oil or a sermon from Doctor Hawks; he is noticeable for nothing in the world except for the markedness by which he is noticeable for nothing.

What is the precise circulation of “The Knickerbocker” at present I am unable to say; it has been variously stated at from eight to eighteen hundred subscribers. The former estimate is no doubt too low, and the latter, I presume, is far too high. There are, perhaps, some fifteen hundred copies printed.

At the period of his brother’s decease, Mr. Lewis G. Clark bore to him a striking resemblance, but within the last year or two there has been much alteration in the person of the editor of the “Knickerbocker.” He is now, perhaps, forty-two or three, but [page 111:] still good-looking. His forehead is, phrenologically, bad — round and what is termed “bullety.” The mouth, however, is much better, although the smile is too constant and lacks expression; the teeth are white and regular. His hair and whiskers are dark, the latter meeting voluminously beneath the chin. In height Mr. C. is about five feet ten or eleven, and in the street might be regarded as quite a “personable man;” in society I have never had the pleasure of meeting him. He is married, I believe.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ANNE C. LYNCH.

MISS ANNE CHARLOTTE LYNCH has written little; — her compositions are even too few to be collected in volume form. Her prose has been, for the most part, anonymous — critical papers in “The New York Mirror” and elsewhere, with unacknowledged contributions to the annuals, especially “The Gift,” and “The Diadem,” both of Philadelphia. Her “Diary of a Recluse,” published in the former work, is, perhaps, the best specimen of her prose manner and ability. I remember, also, a fair critique on Fanny Kemble’s poems; — this appeared in “The Democratic Review.”

In poetry, however, she has done better, and given evidence of at least unusual talent. Some of her compositions in this way are of merit, and one or two of excellence. In the former class I place her “Bones in the Desert,” published in “The Opal “ for 1846, her “Farewell to Ole Bull,” first printed in “The Tribune,” and one or two of her sonnets — not forgetting some graceful and touching lines on the death of Mrs. Willis. In the latter class I place two noble poems, “The Ideal” and “The Ideal Found.” These should be considered as one, for each is by itself imperfect. In modulation and vigor of rhythm, in dignity and elevation of sentiment, in metaphorical appositeness and accuracy, and in energy of expression, I really do not know where to point out anything American much superior to them. Their ideality is not so manifest as their passion, but I think it an unusual indication of taste in Miss Lynch, or (more strictly) of an intuitive sense of poetry’s true nature, that this passion is just sufficiently subdued [page 112:] to lie within the compass of the poetic art, within the limits of the beautiful. A step farther and it might have passed them. Mere passion, however exciting, prosaically excites; it is in its very essence homely, and delights in homeliness: but the triumph over passion, as so finely depicted in the two poems mentioned, is one of the purest and most idealizing manifestations of moral beauty.

In character Miss Lynch is enthusiastic, chivalric, self-sacrificing, “equal to any fate,” capable of even martyrdom in whatever should seem to her a holy cause — a most exemplary daughter. She has her hobbies, however, (of which a very indefinite idea of “duty” is one,) and is, of course, readily imposed upon by any artful person who perceives and takes advantage of this most amiable failing.

In person she is rather above the usual height, somewhat slender, with dark hair and eyes — the whole countenance at times full of intelligent expression. Her demeanor is dignified, graceful, and noticeable for repose. She goes much into literary society.

 


[[Footnotes]]

[The following footnote appears at the bottom of page 101:]

*  Thomas Dunn English.

 


∞∞∞∞∞∞∞

Notes:

The entry for Mrs. Osgood is substantially revised from that printed in “The Literati” of 1846. The revised version was first printed in the Southern Literary Messenger for August 1849. Interestingly, the references to the number of years, such as in the first sentence, have been changed by one year from those given in Godey’s, suggesting that the revision was made in 1847. Most of the manuscript of this later version of the entry survives in several fragments, probably intended for Poe’s proposed “Literary America” of 1848. The Griswold text omits, from page 95, quotations of Mrs. Osgood’s poems “The Music Box” and “If He Can”; from page 96, a quotation from “The Unexpected Declaration”; and from page 98, quotations from “She Loves Him Yet” and a poem beginning “Yes, lower to the level.” All of these quotations are given in the manuscript. It is reasonable to presume that Griswold cut out these long quotations for the sake of shortening the entry. One sentence in the Griswold version which does not appear in the original is on page 98, reading, “It is not only rhythmically perfect, but it evinces much originality in its structure.” Whether Griswold added it or had a text revised by Poe is a matter of conjecture.

 

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞
[S:1 - WORKS, 1850] - Edgar Allan Poe Society of Baltimore - Works - Misc - The Literati [part 05] (Text-D)

Last Update: June 28, 2013   Navigation:  Main Menu    Poe’s Works    Poe’s Criticism
Text: Edgar Allan Poe, “Review of The Poetical Writings of E. O. Smith” [Text-02], Godey’s Lady’s Book, vol. XXXI, no. 6, December 1845, pp. 261-265

∞∞∞∞∞∞∞

[page 261, unnumbered, full page width:]

LITERARY CRITICISM.

BY EDGAR A. POE.

[column 1:]

THE POETICAL WRITINGS OF ELIZABETH OAKES SMITH. First complete edition. New York. J. S. Redfield.

THIS is a very pretty little volume, neatly printed, handsomely bound, embracing some two hundred pages sixteen mo., and introduced to the public, somewhat un-necessarily, in a preface by Dr. Rufus W. Griswold. In this preface we find some few memoranda of the personal authoress, with some critical opinions in regard to her poems. The memoranda are meagre. A much more interesting account of Mrs. Smith is given by Mr. John Neal, and was included by Mr. John Keese in the introduction to a former collection of her works. The critical opinions may as well be here quoted, at least in part. Dr. Griswold says —

“Seeking expression, yet shrinking from notoriety, and with a full share of that respect for a just fame and appreciation which belongs to every high-toned mind, yet oppressed by its shadow when circumstance is the impelling motive of publication, the writings of Mrs. Smith might well be supposed to betray great inequality; still in her many contributions to the magazines, it is remarkable how few of her pieces display the usual carelessness and haste of magazine articles. As an essayist especially, while graceful and lively, she is compact and vigorous; while through poems, essays, tales and criticisms, (for her industrious pen seems equally skilful and happy in each of these departments of literature,) through all her manifold writings, indeed, there runs the same beautiful vein of philosophy, viz: — that truth and goodness of themselves impart a holy light to the mind which gives it a power far above mere intellectuality; that the highest order of human intelligence springs from the moral and not the reasoning faculties. . . . . . . Mrs. Smith’s most popular poem is ‘The Acorn,’ which, though inferior in high inspiration to ‘The Sinless Child,’ is by many preferred for its happy play of fancy and proper finish. Her sonnets, of which she has written many, have not yet been as much admired as the ‘April Rain,’ ‘The Brook,’ and other fugitive pieces, which we find in many popular collections.”

“The Sinless Child” was originally published in the “Southern Literary Messenger,” where it at once attracted much attention from the novelty of its conception and the general grace and purity of its style. Undoubtedly it is one of the most original of American poems — surpassed in this respect, we think, only by Maria del Occidente’s “Bride of Seven.” Of course, we speak merely of long poems. We have had in this country many brief fugitive pieces far excelling in this most important point (originality) either “The Bride of Seven” or “The Sinless Child” — far excelling, indeed, any transatlantic poems. After all, it is chiefly in works of what is absurdly termed “sustained effort” that we fall in any material respect behind our progenitors.”The Sinless Child” is quite long, including more than two hundred stanzas, generally of eight lines. The metre throughout is iambic tetrameter, alternating with trimeter — in other words, lines of four iambuses alternate with lines of three. The variations from this order are rare. The design of the poem is very imperfectly made out. The conception is much better than the execution. “A simple cottage maiden, Eva, given to the world in the widowhood of one parent and the angelic existence of the other, . . . . . . is found from her birth to be as meek and gentle as are those pale flowers that look imploringly upon us . . . . . She is gifted with the power of interpreting the beautiful mysteries of our earth . . . . . For her the song of the bird is not merely the gushing forth of a nature too full of blessedness to be silent . . . . the humblest plant, the simplest insect is each alive with truth . . . She sees the world not merely with mortal eyes, but looks within to the pure internal life of which the outward is but a type,” etc., etc. These passages are taken from the Argument prefixed to Part I. The general thesis of the poetess may, perhaps, be stated as the demonstration that the superior wisdom is moral rather than intellectual; but it may be doubted whether her subject was ever precisely apparent to herself. In a word, she seems to have vacillated between several conceptions — the only very definitive idea being that of extreme beauty and purity in a child. At one time we fancy her, for example, attempting to show that the condition of absolute sanctity is one through which mortality may know all things and hold converse with the angels; at another we suppose it her purpose to “create” (in critical language) an entirely novel being, a something that is neither angel nor mortal, nor yet fairy in the ordinary sense — in a word, an original ens. Besides these two prominent fancies, however, there are various others which seem continually flitting in and out of the poet’s vision, so that her whole work has [page 262:] an indeterminate air. Of this she apparently becomes conscious towards the conclusion, and in the final stanza endeavours to remedy the difficulty by summing up her design —

“The sinless child, with mission high,
Awhile to earth was given,
To show us that our world should be
The vestibule of heaven.
Did we but in the holy light
Of truth and goodness rise,
We might communion hold with God
And spirits from the skies.”
The conduct of the narrative is scarcely more determinate — if, indeed, “The Sinless Child” can be said to include a narrative at all. The poem is occupied in its first part with a description of the child, her saintly character, her lone wanderings, the lessons she deduces from all animal and vegetable things, and her communings with the angels. We have then discussions with her mother, who is made to introduce episodical tales, one of “Old Richard,” another called “The Defrauded Heart,” (a tale of a miser,) and another entitled “The Stepmother.” Towards the end of the poem a lover, Alfred Linne, is brought upon the scene. He has been reckless and sinful, but is reclaimed by the heavenly nature of Eva. He finds her sleeping in a forest. At this point occur some of the finest and most characteristic passages of the poem.

“Unwonted thought, unwonted calm
Upon his spirit fell;
For he unwittingly had sought
Young Eva’s hallowed dell,
And breathed that atmosphere of love,
Around her path that grew;
That evil from her steps repelled
The good unto her drew.”
Mem. — The last quatrain of this stanza would have been more readily comprehended if punctuated and written thus —

“And breathed that atmosphere of love
Around her path that grew —
That evil from her steps repelled —
That good unto her drew.”
We may as well observe here, too, that although neatly printed, the volume abounds in typographical errors that very frequently mar the sense — as at page 66, for example, where come (near the bottom) is improperly used for came, and scorching (second line from the top) is substituted for searching. We proceed with Alfred’s discovery of Eva in the wood.

“Now Eva opes her child-like eyes
And lifts her tranquil head;
And Albert, like a guilty thing,
Had from her presence fled.
But Eva marked his troubled brow,
His sad and thoughtful eyes,
As if they sought yet shrank to hold
Their converse with the skies.”
Communion with the skies — would have been far better. It seems strange to us that any one should have overlooked the word.

“And all her kindly nature stirred,
She prayed him to remain;
Well conscious that the pure have power,
To balm much human pain.
There mingled too, as in a dream,
About brave Albert Linne,
A real and ideal form,
Her soul had formed within.”
We give the punctuation here as we find it; — it is incorrect throughout, interfering materially with a proper understanding of the passage. There should be a comma after “And” in the first line, a comma in place of the semicolon at the end of the second line, no point at the end of the third line, a comma after “mingled,” and none after “form.” These seeming minutiæ are of real importance; but we refer to them, in the case of “The Sinless Child,” because here the aggregate of this species of minor error is unusually remarkable. Of course it is the proof-reader or editor, and not Mrs. Smith, who is to blame.

“Her trusting hand fair Eva laid
In that of Albert Linne,
And for one trembling moment turned
Her gentle thoughts within.
Deep tenderness was in the glance
That rested on his face,
As if her woman-heart had found
Its own abiding-place.
 
“And evermore to him it seemed
Her voice more liquid grew —
“ [[‘]]Dear youth, thy soul and mine are one;
One source their being drew!
And they must mingle everymore —
Thy thoughts of love and me[[’]]
Will, as a light, thy footsteps guide
To life and mystery.’
 
“There was a sadness in her tone,
But love unfathomed deep;
As from the centre of the soul
Where the divine may sleep;
Prophetic was the tone and look,
And Albert’s noble heart
Sank with a strange foreboding dread
Lest Eva should depart.
 
“And when she bent her timid eyes
As she beside him knelt,
The pressure of her sinless lips
Upon his brow he felt,
And all of earth and all of sin
Fled from her sainted side;
She, the pure virgin of the soul,
Ordained young Albert’s bride.”
It would, perhaps, have been out of keeping with the more obvious plan of the poem to make Eva really the bride of Albert. She does not wed him, but dies tranquilly in bed, soon after the spiritual union in the forest, “Eva,” says the Argument of Part VII, “hath fulfilled her destiny. Material things can no farther minister to the growth of her spirit. That waking of the soul to its own deep mysteries — its oneness with another — has been accomplished. A human soul is perfected.” At this point the poem may be said to have its conclusion.

In looking back at its general plan, we cannot fail to see traces of high poetic capacity. The first point to be commended is the reach or aim of the poetess. She is evidently discontented with the bald routine of common-place themes, and originality has been with her a principal object. In all cases of fictitious composition it should be the first object — by which we do not mean to say that it can ever be considered as the most important. But, ceteris paribus, every class of fiction is the better for originality; every writer is false to his own interest if he fails to avail himself, at the outset, of the effect which is certainly and invariably derivable from the great element, novelty.

The execution of “The Sinless Child” is, as we have already said, inferior to its conception — that is, to its conception as it floated, rather than steadily existed, in the brain of the authoress. She enables us to see that she has very narrowly missed one of those happy “creations” which now and then immortalize the poet. With a good deal more of deliberate thought before putting pen to paper, with a good deal more of the constructive ability, and with more rigorous discipline in the minor merits of style, and of what is termed in the school-prospectuses, composition, Mrs. Smith would have made of “The Sinless Child” one of the best, if not the very best of American poems. While speaking of the execution, or, more properly, the conduct of the work, we may as well mention, first, the obviousness with which the stories introduced by Eva’s mother are interpolated, or episodical; it is permitted every reader to see that they have no natural connection with the true theme; and, indeed, there can be no doubt that they were written long before the main narrative was projected. In the second place, we must allude to the artificiality of the Arguments, or introductory prose passages, prefacing each Part of the poem. Mrs. Smith had no sounder reason for employing them than Milton and the rest of the epicists have employed them before. If it be said that they are necessary for the proper comprehension of a poem, we reply that this is saying nothing for them, but merely much against the poem which demands them as a necessity. Every work of art should contain within itself all that is required for its own comprehension. An “argument” is but another form of the “This is an ox” subjoined to the portrait of an animal with horns. But in making these objections to the management of “The Sinless Child,” we must not be understood as insisting upon them as at all material, in view of the lofty merit of originality — a merit which pervades and invigorates the whole work, and which, in our opinion, at least, is far, very far more than sufficient to compensate for every inartisticality of construction. A work of art may be admirably constructed, and yet be null as regards every essentiality of that truest art which is but the happiest development of nature; but no work of art can embody within itself a proper originality without giving the plainest manifestations of the creative spirit, or, in more common parlance, of genius in its author. The originality of “The Sinless Child” would cover a multitude of greater defects than Mrs. Smith ever committed, and must forever entitle it to the admiration and respect of every competent critic.

As regards detached passages, we think that the episode of “The Stepmother” may be fairly cited as the best in the poem.

“You speak of Hobert’s second wife, a lofty dame and bold;
I like not her forbidding air, and forehead high and cold.
The orphans have no cause for grief: she dare not give it now,
Though nothing but a ghostly fear her heart of pride could bow.
 
“One night the boy his mother called; they heard him weeping say,
‘Sweet Mother, kiss poor Eddy’s cheek and wipe his tears away.’
Red grew the lady’s brow with rage, and yet she feels a strife
Of anger and of terror, too, at thought of that dead wife.
 
“Wild roars the wind; the lights burn blue; the watchdog howls with fear;
Loud neighs the steed from out the stall. What form is gliding near?
No latch is raised, no step is heard, but a phantom fills the space —
A sheeted spectre from the dead, with cold and leaden face.
 
“What boots it that no other eye beheld the shade appear?
The guilty lady’s guilty soul beheld it plain and clear.
It slowly glides within the room and sadly looks around,
And, stooping, kissed her daughter’s cheek with lips that gave no sound.
 
“Then softly on the step-dame’s arm she laid a death-cold hand,
Yet it hath scorched within the flesh like to a burning brand;
And gliding on with noiseless foot, o’er winding stair and hall,
She nears the chamber where is heard her infant’s trembling call.
 
“She smoothed the pillow where he lay, she warmly tucked the bed,
She wiped his tears and stroked the curls that clustered round his head.
The child, caressed, unknowing fear, hath nestled him to rest;
The mother folds her wings beside — the mother from the blest!”
The metre of this episode has been altered from its original form, and, we think, improved by the alteration. Formerly, in place of four lines of seven iambuses, the stanza consisted of eight lines — a line of four iambuses alternating with one of three — a more ordinary and artificial, therefore a less desirable arrangement. In the three last quatrains there is an awkward vacillation between the present and perfect tenses, as in the words “beheld,” “glides,” “kissed,” “laid,” “hath scorched,” “smoothed,” “wiped,” “hath nestled,” “folds.” These petty objections, of course, will by no means interfere with the reader’s appreciation of the episode, with his admiration of its pathos, its delicacy and its grace — we had almost forgotten to say of its pure and high imagination.

We proceed to cull from “The Sinless Child,” a few brief but happy passages at random.

“Gentle she was and full of love,
With voice exceeding sweet,
And eyes of dove-like tenderness
Where joy and sadness meet.”
——
“——— with calm and tranquil eye
That turned instinctively to seek
The blueness of the sky.”
——
“Bright missals from angelic throngs
In every bye-way left —
How were the earth of glory shorn
Were it of flowers bereft!”
——
“And wheresoe’er the weary heart
Turns in its dim despair,
The meek-eyed blossom upward looks,
Inviting it to prayer.”
——
“The very winds were hushed to peace
Within the quiet dell,
Or murmured through the rustling bough
Like breathings of a shell.”
——
“The mystery of life;
Its many hopes, its many fears,
Its sorrow and its strife —
A spirit to behold in all
To guide, admonish, cheer —
Forever, in all time and place,
To feel an angel near.”
——
“I may not scorn the spirit’s rights,
For I have seen it rise,
All written o’er with thought, thought, thought,
As with a thousand eyes!”
——
“And there are things that blight the soul
As with a mildew blight,
And in the temple of the Lord
Put out the blessed light.”
It is in the point of passages such as these, in their vigour, terseness and novelty, combined with exquisite delicacy, that the more obvious merit of the poem consists. A thousand such quotable paragraphs are interspersed through the work, and of themselves would be sufficient to insure its popularity. But we repeat that a far loftier excellence lies perdu amid the minor deficiencies of “The Sinless Child.”

The other poems of the volume are, as entire compositions, nearer perfection, but, in general, have less of the true poetical element. “The Acorn” is perfect as regards its construction — although, to be sure, the design is so simple that it could scarcely be marred in its execution. The idea is the old one of detailing the progress of a plant from its germ to its maturity, with the uses and general vicissitudes to which it is subjected. In this case of the acorn the vicissitudes are well imagined, and the execution is more skilfully managed — is more definite, vigorous and pronounced, than in the longer poem. The chief of the minor objections is to the rhythm, which is imperfect, vacillating awkwardly between iambuses and anapæsts, after such fashion that it is impossible to decide whether the rhythm in itself — that is, whether the general intention is anapæstical or iambic. Anapæsts introduced, for the relief of monotone, into an iambic rhythm, are not only admissible but commendable, if not absolutely demanded; but in this case they prevail to such an extent as to overpower the iambic intention, thus rendering the whole versification difficult of comprehension. We give, by way of example, a stanza with the scanning divisions and quantities —

“They came | with gifts | that should life | bestow; |
The dew | and the li | ving air — |
The bane | that should work | its dead | ly wo, |
The lit | tle men | had there; |
In the gray | moss cup | was the mil | dew brought, |
The worm | in a rose- | leaf rolled
And ma | ny things | with destuc | tion fraught |
That its doom | were quick | ly told.” |
Here iambuses and anapæsts are so nearly balanced that the ear hesitates to receive the rhythm as either anapæstic or iambic — that is, it hesitates to receive it as anything at all. A rhythm should always be distinctly marked by its first foot — that is to say, if the design is iambic, we should commence with an unmistakeable iambus, and proceed with this foot until the ear gets fairly accustomed to it before we attempt variation; for which, indeed, there is no necessity unless for the relief of monotone. When the rhythm is in this manner thoroughly recognized, we may sparingly vary with anapæsts (or, if the rhythm be trochaic, with dactyls). Spondees, still more sparingly, as absolute discords, may be also introduced either in an iambic or trochaic rhythm. In common with a very large majority of American, and, indeed, of European poets, Mrs. Smith seems to be totally unacquainted with the principles of versification — by which, of course, we mean its rationale. Of technical rules on the subject there are rather more than enough in our prosodies, and from these abundant rules are deduced the abundant blunders of our poets. There is not a prosody in existence which is worth the paper on which it is printed.

Of the miscellaneous poems included in the volume before us, we greatly prefer “The Summons Answered.” It has more of power, more of genuine imagination than anything written by its author. It is a story of three “bacchanals,” who, on their way from the scene of their revelry, are arrested by the beckoning of a white hand from the partially unclosing door of a tomb. One of the party obeys the summons. It is the tomb of his wife. We quote the two concluding stanzas.

“This restless life with its little fears,
Its hopes that fade so soon,
With its yearning tenderness and tears,
And the burning agony that sears —
The sun gone down at noon —
The spirit crushed to its prison wall,
Mindless of all beside —
This young Richard saw, and felt it all —
Well might the dead abide!
 
“The crimson light in the east is high,
The hoar-frost coldly gleams,
And Richard chilled to the heart well-nigh,
Hath raised his wildered and bloodshot eye
From that long night of dreams.
He shudders to think of the reckless band
And the fearful oath he swore —
But most he thinks of the clay-cold hand
That opened the old tomb door.”
With the quotation of these really noble passages — noble, because full of the truest poetic energy — we take leave of the fair authoress. She is entitled, beyond doubt, to all, and perhaps to much more than the commendation she has received. Her faults are among the peccadilloes, and her merits among the sterling excellencies of the muse.